Title: 2607.22364v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.22364v1

Published Time: Mon, 27 Jul 2026 00:50:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 54

Markdown Content:
1

Mechanisms of Microstructural Evolution and Degradation in Aluminum under High -

Damage Irradiation 

Alhassan S. Issaka, Sadie Wicks, Vishal Yadav, Assel Aitkaliyeva, M ichael R. Tonks and S imon 

R. Phillpot* 

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 

32611, USA 

Abstract 

Aluminum alloys are widely used in research reactor systems, yet the mechanisms governing 

irradiation‑induced degradation remain poorly understood. Here we combine conventional 

cascade -overlap molecular dynamics simulations with an accelerated Iterative Ki netic Approach 

(IKA) to investigate defect evolution in single‑crystal Al subjected to 50 keV He irradiation. 

Benchmarking shows that IKA reproduces the essential defect kinetics of cascade simulations 

while enabling access to substantially higher accumulated damage. By extending the IKA to 

higher damage levels, we identified three distinct regimes governing radiation -induced 

degradation in Al: recombination -driven annihilation, defect accumulation, and sink -controlled 

absorption. At higher damage , Frank loops dissociate into Shockley partials and stair‑rod loops ,

ultimately driving the nucleation and growth of stacking‑fault tetrahedra (SFTs). These 

transformations progressively convert mobile defects into SFTs . Ultimately, t he synergistic effect 

of interstitial and vacancy loops , and SFT increases irradiation hardening in Al at 300K . This work 

provid es insight into irradiation‑induced degradation in aluminum reactor materials. 

* Corresponding author:  phillpot@ufl.edu 2

# Introduction 

High -energy atomic collisions in structural materials underpin many advanced material 

technologies, including semiconductor processing 1,2 , aerospace manufacturing 3, and nuclear 

power generation 4. In nuclear reactors, structural components and containment systems 

experience sustained d egradation from prolonged exposure to energetic particles in harsh operating 

environments. Among materials used in nuclear applications, Al and its alloys are particularly 

important in research reactors because of their low neutron absorption cross -section, high thermal 

conductivity, and excellent corrosion resistance 5. Al alloys are therefore widely used in fuel 

cladding, guide tubes, and reactor containers 6–8. Notably, AA6061 -T6 and AlFeNi alloys ,

containing approximately 97 –98 wt.% and 60 –90 wt.% Al , respectively , are extensively employed 

as core structural and fuel cladding materials in materials testing reactors, TRIGA reactors, and 

miniature neutron source reactors 5,9 .

In Al alloys, irradiation significantly modifies the elastic -plastic behavior through the 

generation and evolution of radiation -induced defects. Irradiation first produces point defects, 

including vacancies and interstitial dumbbells with multiple orientat ions 10,11 , which subsequently 

migrate and coalesce into t hree -dimensional defect clusters and prismatic dislocation loops 12 . Zhu 

et al. 13 observed dot -like features in Kr -ion -irradiated Ti -Al alloys, later identified as interstitial 

clusters. Similarly, irradiation of high -entropy fiber -strengthened Al -based alloys leads to the 

preferential nucleation of voids and dislocation loops as the d ominant defect structures 14 . Under 

long -range diffusion conditions, vacancy clusters may collapse into three -dimensional stacking 

fault tetrahedra (SFTs), acting as strong obstacles to dislocation motion in Al 15 . At higher d amage 

(~50 dpa) irradiation -induced precipitation has been reported in Al alloys, accompanied by the 

formation of large, densely distributed voids that are more pronounced than in non -Al systems 16 .

While experimental studies of radiation damage in Al alloys are important, modeling and 

simulation can provide details of defect generation that cannot be obtained with experiments. 

Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are widely used to investigate radiation damage evolution 

at the atomic scale. Radiation damage in MD can be broadly divided into two stages based on the 

timeline for production of defects : the ballistic and kinetic stages. The ballistic stage lasts 

approximately 1 ps and captures the initial formation of very rapidly moving point defects, 

characterized by intense thermal spikes. This is followed by the long -term kinetic stage, during 3

which athermal and/or thermal recombination, defect clustering, and diffusion -driven processes 

dominate and ultimately govern the radiation response of the material 4. Explicit MD simulation 

of the ballistic stage is computationally expensive due to the extremely rapid system evolution, 

which necessitates very small time steps. Moreover, coupling high -energy collision potentials such 

as the Ziegler –Biersack –Littmark (ZBL) screened nuclear repulsion can lead to over - or under -

prediction of the threshold displacement energy . This affects the residual defects , owing to the 

strong sensitivity of cascade dynamics to the r₁ –r₂ switching interval 17 . Despite this, the MD 

method serves as a useful tool for understanding defect formation due to radiation damage in Al .

Several studies have investigated the impact of radiation damage in Al using MD. Goryaeva et 

al. 18 investigated cumulative irradiation damage in Al up to 0.014 dpa and reported the nucleation 

of A15 nanophase clusters that precede dislocation loop formation. Da Fonseca et al. 19 examined 

the mechanisms governing irradiation creep in Al and showed that, at 0.03 dpa, applied stress 

promotes the preferential nucleation of well -oriented dislocation loops, leading to microstructural 

anisotropy. Their results demonstrate that stress -induced preferential nucleation dominates over 

stress -induced preferential absorption under electron irradiation. Using 1 MeV Kr ions through 

~100 nm titanium aluminum alloy, Zhu et al. 13 observed that at ~ 1.57 dpa , local stress 

accumulation near large interstitial clusters and lamellar interfaces triggers the nucleation and 

propagation of stacking faults . Similarly, Jourdan et al. 20 reported the formation of three -

dimensional compact A15 Frank –Kasper nanophases and their subsequent transformation into 

two -dimensional Frank loops at 0.03 dpa . Wang et al. 21 further showed that increasing the Al 

content in AlₓCoCrFeNi alloys enhances radiation damage by increasing the peak Frenkel pair 

production due to a reduced threshold displacement energy and by prolonging the thermal spike at 

different PKA energies . Nevertheless , current existing MD studies of radiation damage in Al are 

limited to low -damage regimes because of the high computational cost of both the very short time 

steps required during the ballistic phase and the need to run thousands of cascade -overlap 

simulations. As a result, a comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms governing the 

nucleation and transformation of point defects into extended defects such as stacking fault 

tetrahedra and dislocation loops, remains lacking. Additionally, understanding how irradiation -

induced microstructure affects the mechanical response in Al is limited. 4

In this study, we apply a cascade -informed accelerated method, the Iterative Kinetic Approach 

(IKA), to investigate irradiation damage evolution in aluminum under 50 keV He²⁺ irradiation. We 

first benchmark the accuracy of IKA against conventional cascade overlap (CA) simulations using 

primary knock -on atom (PKA) events and then extend its application to higher damage levels. 

Through this framework, we systematically analyze the formation of point defects, their evolution 

into clusters, and the emergence of complex dislocation networks and stacking fault tetrahedra 

(SFTs), in qualitative agreement with experimentally observed irradiation -induced SFTs in Al and 

Au 15,22 . We further provide mechanistic insights into dislocation faulting and unfaulting reactions 

and elucidate the role of intrinsic irradiation -induced stress on defect dynamics. Finally, we 

quantify the contributions of different defect obstacles to irradiation hardening in Al. This work 

establishes a mechanistic link between radiation -induced defect evolution and the resulting 

mechanical response, providing insight into microstru ctural degradation in Al reactor materials 

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. First, we describe the simulation 

methodology, including cascade -overlap simulations, the IKA method , and defect analysis 

procedures. next , we validate IKA by benchmarking its predictions against conventional cascade -

overlap simulations, followed by an exploration of high -damage defect evolution, including 

isolated defect kinetics, vacancy clustering, interstitial clustering, dislocation formation, SFT 

nucleation and irradiation -induced hardening . Finally, we discuss these results in the context of 

existing literature and provide our conclusions .

# Results 

This section is divided into two main parts. First, we benchmark the evolution of defects (point 

defects and clusters) from the IKA against full conventional cascade -overlap simulations and then 

we extend the IKA to higher damage levels and characterize the resulting defect evolution .

Dynamics of Defects: IKA versus Cascade overlap 

Here we present results from consecutive cascade -overlap approach (CA) and consecutive 

IKA simulations to understand how the dynamics of isolated point defects and cluster evolutions 

compare between the two methods . Fig. 1a compares the total defect fraction, defined as the sum 5

of isolated point defects and atoms in all clusters divided by the total number of atoms in the simulation cell (276,480). 

Fig. 1. Comparison of defect evolution and microstructure predicted by IKA and CA simulations. a) Total defect fraction (off -lattice atoms) as a function of damage. The red dashed line b1) marks the IKA 

damage (0.033 dpa) at which the total defect fraction matches that of the CA simulation at 0.061 dpa c1), while the black dashed line d1) denotes the IKA state at the same nominal damage of 0.061 dpa. 

Representative atomic snapshots of IKA at b) 0.033 dpa, c) CA at 0.061 dpa, and d) IKA at 0.061 dpa. e) Area -normalized interstitial pair -correlation comparison between CA and IKA at the same damage 

(0.061 dpa). f) Corresponding comparison between CA at 0.061 dpa and IKA at 0.033 dpa, selected to match the total defect fra ction. Red atoms are interstitials and b lue atoms are vacancies 

Cascade (0.06 1 dpa) 

c1 

b1 

# a

# c

IKA (0.03 3 dpa) 

# b

d1 

1

IKA (0.061dpa) 

# d

R = 0.998 

RMSD = 0.0076 

R = 0.9 84 

RMSD = 0.0 545 

# f

# e

> Total Defect Fraction

6

At early stages of damage, both methods exhibit nearly identical defect fractions. As 

damage accumulates, however, the IKA produces defects more rapidly than the CA, such that by 

0.06 1 dpa the total defect fraction in the IKA is approximately twice that of the CA. Notably, the 

defect fraction obtained from the IKA at 0.033 dpa is comparable to that from the CA at 0.06 1 dpa. 

Representative three -dimensional snapshots from the IKA at 0.033 dpa , and the CA at 0.06 1 dpa 

are shown in Fig. 1 b and 1c, respectively, and reveal strikingly similar defects densities .

Comparison of CA and IKA at 0.061 dpa (Fig. 1 c, d ) shows that IKA predicts approximately twice 

the number of stable defects relative to CA. To determine whether this difference in defect 

concentration affects the local defect arrangement, we performed area -normalized interstitial –

interstitial pair -correlation analysis for two cases: (i ) same damage (dpa) comparison between CA 

0.061 dpa and IKA 0.061 dpa (Fig. 1e), and (ii) an equivalent -defect -fraction comparison between 

CA 0.061 dpa and IKA 0.033 dpa (Fig. 1f). In both cases, the dominant peaks occur at the same 

interstitial separation distances and evolve with overlapping peaks , indicating that the spatial 

arrangement of interstitials is preserved. At same damage (0.061 dpa), the two curves are nearly 

indistinguishable, with a Pearson correlation coefficient of R=0.998 and an RMSD of 0.0076. 

When compared at equivalent defect fraction (CA 0.061 dpa vs. IKA 0.033 dpa), the agreement 

remains strong, with R=0.984 and RMSD = 0.0545, although the larger RMSD reflects a greater 

concentration of pair probability at short interstitial separations in the lower -damage IKA 

configuration than CA at 0.061 dpa . These results indicate that, despite higher number of surviving 

defects, IKA reproduces the same characteristic interstitial spacing and local defect topology 

observed in the cascade -overlap simulations. Because defect clustering kinetics are strongly 

damage/dose dependent, agreement at a single damage level is insufficient to establish 

methodological equivalence, thus comparing IKA and CA simulations across a range of damage 

levels enables assessment of method fidelity and mechanistic equivalence. The details for 

comparing different damage levels for the two methods is discusse d next .

Results of interstitial and vacancy point defects for both methods are shown in Fig. 2 . In 

Fig. 2 a, the fraction of isolated interstitials from the consecutive simulations in both methods drops 

significantly, falling from ~1 at the lowest damage to a shallow plateau of 0.06 – 0.10 by 0.02 dpa. 

However, we notice a small offset between 0.005 dpa and 0.03 dpa where the fraction of isolated 

interstitials from the CA is higher than the IKA. This implies that between 0.005 – 0.03 d pa, the 7

IKA exhibited a higher interstitial clustering than the CA. We attribute such slight offset in the CA 

method to the highly energetic environment in which defects are produced in cascades . The 

ballistic/thermal -spike dynamics can inhibit early interstitial clustering by disrupting weakly 

bound embryonic aggregates, leaving a slightly larger fraction of interstitials as isolated defects in 

the 0.005 – 0.03 dpa regime .

Beyond 0.03 dpa however, the fraction of isolated interstitials in both converges and 

remains the same until the end of the simulation. Such close overlap of the trends indicates that 

the two methods follow the same kinetics of interstitial evolution where isolated interstitials 

rapidly cluster or recombine with other defects, after which a quasi -steady state is established. As 

shown in Fig. 2 b, the fraction of isolated vacancies exhibit s a decreasing trend with increasing 

damage. In contrast to the isolated interstitial behavior in Fig. 2 a, the IKA consistently retains a 

higher fraction of isolated vacancies than the CA, indicating reduced vacancy clustering under the 

same conditions as the CA. Unlike interstitials, which rapidly cluster , vacancies manifest much 

slower clustering kinetics. 

While the absolute number of clusters ( Fig. S3a & S3 b) highlights how efficiently isolated 

point defects in each method are captured into clusters, it does not tell us how large those clusters 

are or the coarsening/growth behavior. To understand this, we show the average interstitial cluster 

sizes in Fig. 2 c. The IKA shows a sharp, nearly linear increase in average interstitial cluster size, 

reaching values above 12 atoms per cluster by 0.02 dpa while the average cluster size in the CA is 

only 6 atoms per cluster at 0.02 dpa. At 0.035 dpa the average cluster size from the IKA peaks with 

19 atoms per cluster, while average cluster size from the CA is 11 atoms per cluster. The CA takes 

more damage to reach peak cluster size, reaching it a round 0.05 dpa with 13 atoms per cluster. 

Although CA produces more interstitial and vacancy clusters at lower damage (0.005 – 0.03 dpa, 

Fig. S3a & S3b), these clusters remain smaller on average than in the IKA. However, the average 

cluster size analysis shows that they both converge at 0.048 dpa ( Fig. 2 c) with similar average 

cluster size thereafter. This suggests that differences in cluster coarsening between IKA and CA 

only exist at lower damage. Beyond 0.048 dpa threshold , they converge and proceed with similar 

kinetics. Next, we examine the evolution of vacancy clusters in the IKA and CA simulations, 

shown in Fig. 2d. Although the average cluster size decreases monotonically with accumulated 

damage in both cases, the IKA consistently yields slightly smaller vacancy cluste rs than the CA, 8

with the difference progressively diminishing as damage increases. Like the interstitial case, the 

vacancy cluster sizes from the two methods converge to nearly the same value at ~0.048 dpa. 

We now examine the microscopic characteristics of interstitial clustering in the IKA and 

CA simulations. Fig. 3a –d shows the distributions of interstitial cluster counts across cluster -size 

ranges at four damage levels (We show the full cluster size distri bution in the supplementary 

material, Fig. S4, a -i). At all damage levels, the distributions are strongly left -skewed, with clusters 

containing 2 –4 and 5 –7 interstitials dominating the population and intermediate -sized clusters (8 –

10 to 21 –25 interstitials) forming a modest shoulder. With increasing damag e, both methods show 

a coherent evolution of the full spectrum: while small clusters remain most abundant, intermediate -

sized clusters become increasingly populated, and the large -cluster tail grows, reflecting continued 

cluster growth and coalescence. 

Fig. 2 . Comparison of interstitial and vacancy defect evolution predicted by IKA and CA as a 

function of damage. a) Fraction of interstitials that are isolated. b) Fraction of vacancies that are 

isolated . Plots a and b are normalized to the total defects , c) Average interstitial cluster size 

(number of interstitials per cluster) and d) Average vacancy cluster size (number of vacancies per 

cluster ). 

# a b

# c d9

At 0.0015 dpa ( Fig. 3 a), the CA produces marginally smaller clusters than the IKA ; at 0.0305 

and 0.0482 dpa ( Fig. 3 b-c) the distributions between the two are largely similar . With 0.0581 dpa 

(Fig. 3 d), the highest damage examined, the two distributions remain broadly similar, with slight 

differences confined primarily to the smallest and largest cluster sizes. Further evidence of such 

close similarity after 0.03 dpa is the reduced heterogeneity between the ratio of the smallest and 

largest cluster sizes shown in Fig. S5. To understand the evolution of interstitial clustering with 

increasing damage, we compute the fraction of interstitials in each cluster -size range, as shown in 

Fig. 3e. As the damage increases, the interstitials redistribute from small clusters of 2 – 10 toward 

large clusters. Importantly, IKA and the CA exhibit very similar atom populations and evolution, 

with only a modest early -damage offset in the onset of very large clusters, indicating both 

approximate the same physical coalescence. Overall, the formation of point defects, their 

clustering behavior, and resulting defect distributions show close agreement between the IKA and 

CA methods. Therefore, we now proceed with only IKA to study higher d amage effects. 

Total Defect Concentration at High Damage 

Having established that the IKA predicts similar defect behavior to the CA, we now apply 

it to go to three times as much damage, which would be computationally very burdensome with 

the CA. To understand the impact of cumulative defect buildup, we examine the total defect 

fraction defined as the sum of isolated point defects and atoms in all clusters divided by the total 

number of atoms in the simulation cell (276,480) with increasing damage in Fig. 4. This is an 

extension of Fig. 2 to higher damage. Becau se the simulation is performed on a single crystal, the 

total number of vacancies and interstitials are equal. At low damage levels, the defect fraction rises 

sharply, reaching nearly 5% at 0.1 dpa, before significant recombination or sink absorption occur s. 

Between 0.1 dpa and 0.15 dpa the fraction of total defects start decreasing. Beyond 0.15 dpa, a 

dynamic equilibrium is established in which defect formation is balanced by annihilation and sink 

absorption, leading to a slight decrease in the defect fraction. 

During damage accumulation, majority of primary defects exist initially as isolated point 

defects, either single self -interstitial atoms (SIAs) or isolated (mono) vacancies, i.e., defects that 

are not part of clusters. Fig. 5 presents the evolution of defect annihilation, defect accumulation, 

the fraction of single SIAs and vacancies, and the concentration of isolated point defects up to 

0.175 dpa. The cumulative fraction of annihilated defects, shown in Fig. 5a, is calculated as :10 

Fig. 3. Comparing interstitial cluster size distribution from IKA and CA. Comparing the distributions of the number of interstitial 

clusters of various sizes from the IKA and CA for increasing amounts of damage from a) 0.0015 dpa, b) 0.0305 dpa, c) 0.0482 d pa, d) 

0.0581 dpa and e) shows the fraction of clustered interstitials in 10 different size ranges. 

b

c

d

e

a11 

Fig. 4. Extension of the IKA defect concentration (fraction) evolution in Fig. 1a to higher damage. 

This is the defect concentration throughout the entire damage up to over 0.175 dpa, three times 

much damage than the CA. 

𝐴 𝑐𝑢𝑚 (𝑑 ) = (1 − 𝑁 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑣 (𝑑 )

> 𝑁 𝐹𝑃 ,𝐼𝑛𝑠 (𝑑 )

) (1) 

where  𝐴 𝑐𝑢𝑚 (𝑑 ) is the cumulative annihilation fraction at damage d,  𝑁 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑣 (𝑑 ) is the total number 

of surviving defects at damage d,  𝑁 𝐹𝑃 ,𝐼𝑛𝑠 (𝑑 ) is the total inserted FPs from the iterative insertions. 

Fig. 5a and 5b reveal three distinct regimes governing the entire defect evolution. In the first 

regime (Regime I), the annihilation fraction increases from nearly zero to ~ 29% at 0.03 dpa. This 

behavior is attributed to the high mobility of freshly created defects, particularly interstitials, which 

can migrate relatively freely due to the low defect density and limited obstacles. As a result, 

recombination between vacancies and SIAs is highly efficient. At this stage, absorption at sinks is 

minimal because the dislocation density is still low and insufficient to provide significant sink 

strength (See Fig. S1 ). Consistently, Fig. 5b shows that the defect survival (accumulation) fraction 

decreases from 1.0 to approximately 0.70 over the same damage interval, directly mirroring the 

increase in annihilation. 

In the second regime (Regime II), the annihilation fraction decreases from ~29% to nearly 

zero at 0.09 dpa, while the defect survival fraction increases (Fig. 5b). This indicates that 

recombination becomes progressively less efficient as defect density inc reases. As damage 

> Total Defect Fraction

12 

accumulates, defect -defect interactions and clustering become more probable, limiting the ability 

of mobile interstitials to recombine with vacancies. Instead, defects increasingly participate in 

cluster formation, reducing the net recombination rate. 

Fig. 5 . Regimes of different defects evolution up to 0.175 dpa. a) Fraction of all inserted defects 

annihilated showing the recombination and sink control absorption regimes, b) Fraction of all 

inserted defects that have survived/accumulated, thus depicting defects accumulation regime, c) 

Fraction of single point defects. a -c is normalized by the total inserted defects (FPs), d) 

concentration of single point defects (normalize by total atoms in the cell). The numbers 1, 2 and 

3 represent the three damage regimes which are discussed in the discussion section. 

Beyond 0.09 dpa, the annihilation fraction begins to increase again, while the survival fraction 

decreases. This third regime corresponds to the activation of sink absorption mechanisms, 

primarily through the formation of dense dislocation networks and ext ended defect structures that 

act as efficient sinks. Thus, although recombination is suppressed in Regime II, annihilation re -

a b

c d

1 2 3

> Absorption

1 2 313 

emerges in Regime III due to enhanced sink absorption rather than direct vacancy –interstitial 

recombination .

Fig. 5 c shows the fraction of single (non -clustered) point defects normalized by the total 

inserted Frenkel pairs. Both single interstitials and isolated vacancies exhibit a non -monotonic 

decrease with increasing damage, as expected. Notably, single interstitial s decrease much more 

rapidly and stabilize by 0.025 dpa. This faster reduction reflects their lower migration barriers and 

higher mobility, which promote clustering or absorption at sinks. In contrast, isolated vacancies 

persist longer, consistent with the ir lower mobility. Fig. 5d presents the concentration of isolated 

SIAs and vacancies. The concentration of isolated vacancies increases rapidly with damage and 

reaches a plateau near 0.016 at approximately 0.075 dpa. By comparison, isolated SIAs rise more 

gradually and plateau aro und 0.006 at 0.125 dpa. Because Frenkel pair production creates equal 

numbers of vacancies and interstitials, the approximately threefold higher steady -state 

concentration of isolated vacancies indicates that vacancies are significantly less likely to cluster 

than SIAs. In other words, interstitials preferentially form clusters or are absorbed at sinks faster ,

while a larger fraction of vacancies remain isolated. The plateau behavior observed in Fig. 5 d

indicates the onset of a saturation regime in which defect generation is balanced by recombination 

and sink absorption processes . To further elucidate the physical origin of these three regimes, we 

next examine the evolution of defect clusters. 

In Fig. 6 a, the size of the average vacancy cluster increases very slowly . The average cluster 

size is around 2.5 atoms up to around 0.0 25 dpa , as shown in Fig. 6 b. The total fraction of the 

atoms in vacancy clusters is very small during this time. Above 0.025 dpa the fraction of atoms in 

vacancy clusters increases quickly and the average cluster size also begins to grow. Th is increase 

coincides with the decrease in the recombination fraction shown in Fig. 5 b. At 0.09 dpa, the rate 

of increase in the vacancy cluster fraction slows substantially and the average cluster size 

converges to about 5 vacancies. These changes coincide with the second increase in the 

recombination fraction. 14 

Fig. 6 . Defect Clustering up to 0.175 dpa , a) Average cluster size as a function of increasing 

damage , b) fraction of all atoms in volved in interstitial or vacancy clusters . The black dashed lines 

separate the three defect evolution regimes. 

Fig. 6a also presents the average interstitial cluster size as a function of damage and Fig. 

6b the fraction of atoms in interstitial clusters. Unlike vacancy clusters, the average cluster size 

and the fraction of atoms in clusters increase linearly with time at the start of the simulation. The 

highly mobile interstitials quickly migrate and agglomerate, increasing the number and size of the 

interstitial clusters up to average size of 19 interstitials at 0.03 dpa, seven times larger than the 

vacancy clusters at this damage. Between 0.03 and 0.09 dpa, the interstitial cluster size decreases 

linearly, dropping to around 12 atoms by 0.0 9 dpa , although t he fraction of atoms in interstitial 

clusters continues to increase during this period. This coincides with the decrease in the 

recombination fraction from Fig. 5 b. Beyond 0.09 dpa, the average interstitial cluster size and 

interstitial cluster fraction chang e slowly for the rest of the simulation. In this regime , the average 

interstitial cluster size is twice the average vacancy cluster size, and the vacancy cluster fraction is 

around 20% lower than the interstitial cluster fraction. However, t he vacancy cluster density is a 

factor of two higher than the vacancy interstitial clusters and levels off near 0.45 nm⁻³ (Fig. S2). 

Combin in g the information from Figs. 5 and 6, it appears that during the first regime which 

spans from the start of the simulation to 0.03 dpa, the isolated vacancy fraction in Fig. 5 c decreases 

while the vacancy cluster size and vacancy cluster fraction do not change. In addition, the SIA 

fraction in Fig. 5 c decreases substantially and the average interstitial cluster size and interstitial 

cluster fraction increase. This results in an increasing recombination fraction. During the second 

a b15 

regi me , spanning from 0.03 dpa to 0.09 dpa, the isolated vacancy fraction decreases slowly and 

the vacancy cluster size and fraction increase, while the SIA fraction decreases and interstitial 

cluster fraction increases but the average interstitial cluster size decreases. All this results in a 

decrease in the recombination fraction because enough clusters have formed to impede 

recombination. Finally, during the final regime, starting at 0.09 dpa, the fraction of isolated 

vacancies (Fig. 5 c) , SIA, vacancy clusters, and interstitial clusters remained steady , as is the 

average vacancy cluster size. The average interstitial cluster size decreases slightly and then 

increase gradually, and the absorption fraction (absorption because it is the dominant mechanism 

in this damage window) increase s rapidly probably due to enough sink strength . Thus, increases 

in vacancy clustering correspond with higher absorption sink whilst low vacanc y clustering 

corresponds to higher recombination regime .

It is also valuable to see the full distribution of cluster sizes. We first examin e the 

distributions of interstitial clusters in the three regimes in Fig. 7 a – c. Each of the plots shows the 

number of cluster s within the specified cluster size range. At 0.004 8 dpa (Regime I) in Fig. 7 a, the 

cluster distribution is heavily skewed toward s the smallest clusters where over 85 % of all clusters 

contain between 2 and 7 atoms, with only eight clusters in the 8 – 10 atom range and a negligible 

tail beyond 10 atoms. At this regime , the fast -moving interstitials are just beginning to interact and 

cluster. By 0.04 30 dpa (Regime II) in Fig. 7 b, the total number of clusters more than doubles, and 

the distribution broadens significantly. The number of 2 – 4 atom -sized clusters nearly triple s and 

larger clusters form , including 18 with more than 41 interstitials . At 0. 1068 dpa (Regime III) in 

Fig. 7 c, the number of 2 – 4 sized cluster s have again tripled, and all other sizes have at least 

doubled , ex cept for the largest size which increased by 50% . The size of the cluster s continues to 

skew toward small clusters because each IKA iteration seeds new FPs , reducing the relative 

fraction of larger clusters .

In Fig. 7 d and e we show the vacancy cluster size distribution at 0.04 30 and 0. 1068 dpa ;

the results for 0.0048 dpa are not shown because very few vacancy clusters had formed . At 0.04 30 

dpa, vacancy clusters are small, in the 2 –4 atom range, with very few larger clusters. At 0. 1068 

dpa, Fig. 7 e, there is a significant growth in vacancy cluster size diversity, with at least four clusters 

in all cluster ranges . However, the vast majority of the clusters are still in the 2 -4 atom range, with 

more than twice as many vacancy clusters in this range than interstitial clusters. Finally, in Fig. 7 f, 16 

we estimate the ratio between the number of clusters in the largest and the smallest size bins (>41 

atoms / 2 –4 atoms ) to get an idea of the degree of heterogeneity in clustering between vacancies 

and interstitials . It shows a clear asymmetry in clustering dynamics between the two . Interstitials 

exhibit a strong early peak in the large -to -small cluster ratio, reflecting rapid mobility -driven 

coalescence into larger clusters up to 0.03 dpa , followed by stabilization at higher d amage. In 

contrast, vacancy clustering is strongly suppressed at low damage and increases only weakly at 

higher damage, consistent with diffusion -limited accumulation and delayed formation of larger 

vacancy clusters over the entire damage range . Overall, interstitials cluster more readily than 

vacancies. 

Fig. 7. Cluster size distribution from the IKA among all the three damage regimes. Distribution 

of interstitial clusters at a) 0.0048 dpa, b) 0.0430 dpa, c) 0.1068 dpa and vacancy clusters at d) 

0.0430 dpa, e)0.1068 dpa and f) ratio of the cluster count in the >41 and 2 -4 cluster ranges 

(bins) as a function of damage(dpa). 

b

d f

a c

e17 

Dislocation Formation, Structure and Evolution 

At higher damage, material microstructure evolves beyond point defects and clusters to 

form extended defect structures , including dislocation loops, network segments, and stacking -fault 

tetrahedra (SFTs) . These extended defects can be expected to play a central role in determining 

mechanical response of the material and long -term radiation stability. To capture this stage of 

microstructural development, we analyze the nucleation, growth, and evolution of dislocation -

based defects including SFTs ac ross increasing damage levels. Our analysis uses the dislocation 

algorithm in OVITO which captures all possible dislocation types in the system : 1/3 ⟨111 ⟩ Frank 

loops, 1/6 ⟨112 ⟩ Shockley partial loops or chains, 1/6 ⟨110 ⟩ stair -rod loops , 1/2 ⟨110 ⟩ perfect 

dislocations , 1/3 ⟨100 ⟩ Hirth dislocations, and SFTs calculated from the stair -rod segments . To 

estimate the prevalence of SFT s, we use as a reference the idealized geometry of a perfect (non -

truncated) tetrahedron , in which each SFT is bound by six sessile stair -rod dislocations, one along 

each tetrahedral edge. By counting the total number of stair -rod segments in the simulation cell 

and dividing by six, we obtain an approximate SFT population 23 . While not every stair -rod 

segment necessarily participates in a perfect tetrahedral assembly , making our SFT count 

somewhat of an approximation , this procedure gives a consistent, comparative metric for assessing 

relative SFT formation across damage states. The number of SFTs can also be approximated by 

filtering HCP -classified atoms; however, this approach may lead to an even greater overestimation 

because HCP coordination in FCC structures can additionally originate from coherent twin 

boundaries, Shockley p artial dislocations, and highly distorted regions surrounding point -defect 

clusters 

In Fig. 8 a-g, we show 3D snapshots of the dislocation structures present at eight 

representative damage levels , including one from the initial damage regime ( 0.015 dpa ), three from 

the second damage regime ( 0.035 dpa, 0.054 dpa, 0.074 dpa ), and three from the third damage 

regime ( 0.94 dpa, 0.132 dpa and 0.1 61 dpa ). In the low damage regime (Fig. 8 a), largely isolated 

circular 1/3 ⟨111 ⟩ loops dominate, with few 1/6 ⟨112 ⟩ chain s and 1/3 ⟨111 ⟩ loops. In the medium 

damage regime ( Fig. 8 b-d), many more dislocations begin to form and interconnect . By 0.054 dpa ,

as shown in Fig. 8 c, 1/6 ⟨112 ⟩ partials weave through the volume, intersecting with an increasing 18 

number of 1/6 ⟨110 ⟩ junctions and 1/3 ⟨111 ⟩ loops. This intersection density grows further by 0.074 

dpa in Fig. 8 d, where a tangle of dislocation s fills much of the simulation cell. In the final regime, 

perfect SFTs begin form ing. This is evident at 0.094 dpa (Fig. 8 e), where a few perfect SFT have 

already formed as shown in detail in Fig. 8 h, along with an increasing number of 1/6 ⟨110 ⟩ partials 

(See the full supplementary video S1) . At 0.132 dpa in Fig. 8 f, an interconnected dislocation 

network densely fill s the entire cell . Finally, at 0.164 dpa (Fig. 8 g) , 1/6 ⟨110 ⟩ segments dominate .

Specifically, 1/6 ⟨112 ⟩ partials form an interconnected mesh, with the increasing number of 

1/6 ⟨110 ⟩ segments and SFT , perhaps acting as rigid crosslinks at junctions, while there are a few 

large, isolated 1/3 ⟨111 ⟩ loops. Overall, there is a systematic increase in 1/6 ⟨110 ⟩ segment s

throughout the second and third regimes. 19 

Fig. 8. Snapshots of the dislocation networks at different damage levels at a) 0.0152 dpa, b) 0.035 dpa, c) 0.054 dpa, d) 0.074 dpa, e) 

0.094 dpa, f) 0.132 dpa, g) 0.164 dpa and h) showing a perfect individual SFT with core atoms and a coalesced or interacting SF Ts 

showing slight changes in their orientation as damage increases. Blue, green, magenta, cyan, yellow, and red represent 1/2 

⟨110 ⟩

(perfect), 1/6 

⟨112 ⟩ (Shockley), 1/6 

⟨110 

⟩ (stair -rod), 1/3 ⟨111 

⟩ (Frank), 1/3 

⟨100 ⟩ (Hirth), and other dislocations, respectively, with the 

corresponding Burgers vector shown in Table I. 

0.13 20. 094 0.074 

0.054 0.035 0.0152  b c

# d e f g

# h 0. 09 8 0.1 45 

0.16 4

# a20 

Table I. Dislocation types, including the color used in Fig s. 8, 10 -12, and 1 4, the dislocation type, 

and the c orresponding Burgers vector .

Color  Type  Burgers Vector 

Blue  Perfect  1/2 ⟨110 ⟩

Green  Shockley  1/6 ⟨112 ⟩

Magenta  Stair -rod  1/6 ⟨110 ⟩

Cyan  Frank  1/3 ⟨111 ⟩

Yellow 

Red 

Hirth 

Others 

1/3 ⟨100 ⟩

Vari es 

We also carry out a more quantitative analysis of the dislocation evolution with increasing 

damage. Fig. 9a shows the total dislocation line length of individual dislocations. Below 0.01 dpa ,

there is virtually no dislocation activity in the system because the system ha s not yet absorbed 

enough defects to initiate a one -dimensional core misfit. Between 0.01 and 0.02 dpa, Frank 

1/3 ⟨111 ⟩ loops appear and dominate . Above 0.02 dpa , 1/3 ⟨111 ⟩, Shockley 1/6 ⟨112 ⟩, and stair -rod 

1/6 ⟨110 ⟩ partials begin to grow . By 0.04 dpa, the total dislocation line length exceeds 350 nm, 

corresponding to a density of 7.5×10¹⁶ m⁻² , as shown in Fig. 9c. Of this, Frank loops account for 

140 nm (3.0×10¹⁶ m⁻²), Shockley partials for 110 nm (2.36×10¹⁶ m⁻²), and stair -rod partials for 60 

nm (1.29×10¹⁶ m⁻²) in Fig. 9a. With further damage, Shockley partials increase while Frank loops 

decrease, plateauing near 100 nm (2.15×10¹⁶ m⁻²) by 0.1 dpa. As damage increases beyond 0.04 

dpa , the total length of Shockley partials increase s significantly , while the total length of Frank 

loops begin s to decrease , plateau ing at 100 nm by 0.1 dpa .

We also characterize the average dislocation segment length defined as the total individual 

dislocation line length divided by the number of segment s (Fig. 9b). This provides a direct measure 

of dislocation connectivity and interaction. Dislocations composed of a small number of long 

segments tend to be structurally stable and participate weakly in dislocation –dislocation 

interactions, whereas dislocations consisting of many s hort segments are indicative of frequent 

junction formation, fragmentation, and network development ( Fig. 9b, see also, the dislocation 

segment count in Fig. S8 ). Within the first damage regime (up to 0.03 dpa) , t he Frank segments 

exhibit a pronounced maximum length increase from 1 nm to 7 nm , before decreasing to 21 

approximately 3 nm throughout both the second and third damage regimes . By contrast, Shockley 

partial s/loop segments maintain a nearly constant mean length of 1.5 –2 nm throughout the 

simulation , regardless of the damage regime. The Frank loops are almost 100% pure edge while 

Shockley partials/loops are mixed dislocations loops as shown in Fig. S9. The almost circular 

morphology of the Frank loops throughout the simulations confirms that they are interstitial -typed 

loops , as was determine d previously 24 . By their nature, it allows stress to readily concentrate 

along the faulted plane instead of the loop’s edge . The y continue to absorb interstitials ; yet due to 

their sessile nature, they cannot glide away . Instead , they continue to grow into large sessile 

segments , driving their average segment length up to several nanometers . The Shockley partials ,

on the other hand , are mixed edge –screw and glissile by nature , which allows cross‐slip and glide 

that both facilitate loop nucleation and limit continuous individual segment growth, yielding a 

much more uniform, shorter segment length (1 – 2 nm). 

Fig. 9c shows the dislocation density in the three damage regimes. In the first half of the 

first damage regime, the overall dislocation density is almost zero because not enough damage has 

accumulated to initiate one -dimensional core misfit s. In the second damage regime (from 0.03 –

0.09 dpa) the dislocation density increases rapidly up to about 1.50 x 10 17 m-2, indicative of 

significant damage and absorption of point defects which also explains why recombination 

decreases ( Fig. 5 a) . It also indicates t he formation and multiplication of dislocations as the material 

responds to irradiation. Going into the third regime (from 0.09 – 0.175 dpa) , the density increase 

slows, suggesting that no significant dislocation nucleation is happening . The curve then begins to 

saturat e, indicating a dynamic balance between dislocation nucleation and annihilation or 

rearrangement. 22 

Fig. 9. Dislocation behavior with increasing damage , a) Total dislocation line length (nm) for 

different dislocation partials , b) Average dislocation segment length (nm) , c) Dislocation density 

from the entire damage d) Number density of SFT arising from increasing damage. The black dash 

lines separate the three defect evolution regimes. 

Understanding the mechanism by which dislocations absorb or transform under irradiation 

is essential to unraveling how defect interactions drive the evolution of the dislocation network. 

To this end, we analyze sequence s of atomic snapshots that capture the complete transformation 

of multiple dislocations. We present two distinct mechanisms. The first involves the absorption of 

two proximate Frank loops into multiple Shockley loops linked by stair -rod partials , as shown in 

Fig. 10 a – f (See the full movie in supplementary video S2) . At 0.0268 dpa, the loops remain 

distinct. By 0.0280 dpa, stair -rod segments nucleate at their ends, stitching the loops into a single 

“figure -eight” configuration. Between 0.0286 and 0.0290 dpa, approximately 70% of this structure 

transforms into Shockley loops connected by short segments. By 0.0293 –0.0299 dpa, the 

dc

ba23 

transformation is complete, producing a polygonal network of nine Shockley loops linked by 

residual stair -rod and perfect 1/2 ⟨110 ⟩ segments as the remaining Frank character disappears. Thus, 

this transformation is a stair -rod –mediated “stitch -and -transform” mechanism driving loop 

coalescence and reconfiguration. 

Fig. 10. Stitch -and -transform typed nucleation of Shockley loops. Atomic snapshots showing the 

evolution at a) 0.0268 dpa, b) 0.0280 dpa, c) 0.0286 dpa, d) 0.0290 dpa, e) 0.0293 dpa, f) 0.0299 

dpa at increasing damage showing the first dislocation absorption/transf ormation mechanism. 

Two medium sized 1/3 

⟨111 

⟩ lying within a certain critical radius, partially transform into 1/6 

⟨110 ⟩

and eventually transform into 1/6 

⟨112 ⟩ chains . Movies are shown in supplementary video S2 (line 

coloring follows Table 1). 

0.0268 dpa  0.0280 dpa 

0.0293 dpa  0.0299 dpa 

# a b c

# d e f

0.0286 dpa 

0.0290 dpa 24 

Fig. 11 . Dislocation loop coalescence -assisted partial transformation. Atomic snapshots taken at a) 0.0342 dpa, b) 0.0355 dpa, c) 

0.0436 dpa, d) 0.0515 dpa, e) 0.0696 dpa showing a second dislocation absorption/transformation mechanism. Two individual 

1/3 

⟨111 

⟩ loops grow into one large loop and transform into 1/6 

⟨112 

⟩ partials accelerated by secondary 1/6 

⟨112 ⟩ attachment and 

1/6 

⟨110 

⟩ nucleation (segment coloring follows Table 1). 

# a b c

# d e

0.03 42 dpa  0.0355 dpa  0.0436 dpa 

0.0515 dpa 

0.0696 dpa 

Attachment 25 

The second mechanism involves the transformation of two large Frank loops surrounded 

by four smaller Frank loops into several interlocking rings of Shockley loops, a s shown in Fig. 

11 (a – e); this transformation occurs within the second damage regime . By 0.0355 dpa, two large 

Frank loops merge and begin converting into Shockley loops; by 0.0436 dpa, a neighboring ring 

of Shockley loops attaches and triggers transformation from the opposite end ; yet the process 

remains slower than stitch -and -transform. Around 0.0515 dpa, SFT s nucleate at the periphery and 

split into stair -rod segments that aid the conversion. By 0.0696 dpa, ~ 60% of Frank loops have 

dissociated into interlocking rings of Shockley loops. Overall, this is Frank -loop coalescence 

assisted by stair -rod loops and it requires more accumulated damage than the first mechanism. 

It is well -known that SFTs arise from the collapse of stair -rod partials, and their formation 

and growth represent a key stage of microstructural evolution under irradiation 25 . Because SFTs 

is known to act as strong obstacles to dislocation motion, thus promoting pinning, hardening, and 

long -term defect retention, their presence is often closely linked to the radiation tolerance of FCC 

metals 15,26 –29 . Understanding the nucleation and evol ution of these structures with increasing 

damage, is thus essential for interpreting the high -damage behavior of Al . In Fig. 9d we plot the 

number of SFT s as a function of accumulated damage in our simulation cell. The number of SFT s

remain s small (around 0.5 × 10 24 m-3) during the first damage regime and increase s steadily to 4

×10 24 m-3 by the end of the second regime . During the third regime the number of SFT s increase s

further, reaching 8×10 24 m-3 by the end of the simulation .

We now shift attention to understanding the details regarding the nature of transformation s

giving rise to SFT s throughout the damage process. Fig. 12 a show s the nucleation of three stair -

rod segments from Shockley partials at 0.1071 dpa (See the black circle) . By 0.1075 dpa ( Fig. 12 b), 

the stair rods ha ve grown , have more Shockley partials and are beg inning to nucleate a truncated 

SFT (indicated by the arrow). By 0.1081 dpa, the average stair -rod segment length has increased 

and a clear SFT has nucleat ed from the pre -existing Shockley partials . By 0.1087 dpa, a significant 

portion of this dislocation network has transformed into stair -rod segments and one SFT ha s

formed. Around 0.1094 dpa, four merged SFT s have developed but remain attached to the network. 

At 0.1123 dpa, the structure of four interconnected SFT s has matured and detached from the 

dislocation network as a standalone entity (Fig. 12 h) . Such a large, interconnected SFT is a result 

of SFT coalescence under continuous dislocation transformation. 26 

Having established the evolution of the microstructure under increasing damage , we now 

examine its implications for macroscopic properties, particularly irradiation -induced hardening. 

We quantified the irradiation induced hardening contribution from different obstacles using the 

dispersed barrier hardening ( DBH ) model (Fig. 13) . The DBH model estimates the yield stress 

increase Δσ as a function of the number density and size of obstacles (microstructure). The model 

application and description of relevant parameters and assumptions is discussed in the quantitative 

irradiation strengthening section, at the end of the paper. We looked at the contribution from five 

obstacles,  Δ𝜎 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑠 , Δ𝜎 𝑣𝑎𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑠 , Δ𝜎 𝑆𝐹𝑇 , Δ𝜎 𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑠 , Δ𝜎 𝑆 ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑙𝑒𝑦 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑠  and from 

there we calculated the total hardening ( Δ𝜎 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 ). Interstitial clusters dominate the early -stage 

hardening, accounting for nearly 90% of the total strengthening at low damage (< 0.02 dpa) and 

reaching 0.6 GPa. By 0.1 dpa, their contribution rises to 2.0 GPa, while vacancy clusters and SFTs 

contribute 1.0 GPa and 0.5 GPa , respectively. At higher doses, the contributions from interstitial 

and vacancy clusters approach saturation. In contrast, SFT -induced strengthening continues to 

increase, driven by the progressive formation of stair -rod dislocations from Shockley partial 

reactions, which sustain SFT nucleation and growth. 27 

Fig. 12 . Mechanism of SFT nucleation via synergistic Shockley –Frank partial interactions. Nucleation and transformation of 

individual 1/6 

⟨110 

⟩ segments from 1/6 

⟨112 

⟩ Shockley partials into SFTs and their subsequent coalescence. The progressive nucleation 

is shown at a) 0.1071 dpa, b) 0.1075 dpa, c) 0.1081 dpa, d) 0.1087 dpa, e) 0.1094 dpa, f) 0.1097 dpa, g) 0.1123 dpa, h) exten ded 

lateral view of matured coalesced SFT s shown in g. The dashed black circles are for emphasis to guide the reader’s eye 

a b c d

e f g h

0.1071 dpa  0.1075 dpa  0.1081 dpa  0.1087 dpa 

0.1094 dpa  0.1097 dpa  0.1123 dpa  Lateral view 

primary 

secondary 28 

Fig. 13. Hardening contribution from different obstacles. Irradiation induced hardening 

contribution from five different obstacles,  Δ𝜎 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑠 , Δ𝜎 𝑣𝑎𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑠  , Δ𝜎 𝑆𝐹𝑇 , Δ𝜎 𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑠 ,

Δ𝜎 𝑆 ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑙𝑒𝑦 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑠 

# Discussion 

The current study considers only single -crystal Al . We recognize that previous studies have 

confirmed that the presence of multiple grain boundaries may lead to significant differences due 

to grain boundary sink mediated behavior 30,31 . Extending it to polycrystalline materials and other 

crystal systems such as BCC is something we will consider in the future. Our result ( Fig. 1 ) ha s

shown that interstitial cluster growth in the CA simulations proceeds more gradually and only 

saturates and converges with the results of the IKA simulations at higher d amage , consistent with 

prior observations 23,32,33 . We believe this is due to the differences in the defect generation. In Fig. 

1c, the distinct evolution of the average cluster size at low -to -mid damage (< 0.045 dpa) reflects 

fundamental differences in defect generation and spatial correlations between IKA and CA. In IKA, 29 

rapid cluster coalescence arises from the stabilized, sequential insertion of Frenkel pair seeds, 

which minimizes stochastic defect –defect spacing and promotes early defect interaction. By 

contrast, in the CA the ballistic regime introduces strong spatial dispersion, distributing defects 

over larger distances, thereby delaying cluster coalescence. Beyond 0.03 dpa, some of the very 

large clusters in IKA begin to restructure or break into smaller, more stable configurations. This 

behavior is characteristic of Stage II –IV dynamic recovery, marked not only by a reduction in 

average cluster size but also by active dislocation reactions and annihilation 34,35 . Consequently ,

both methods show similar average cluster sizes beyond ~0.048 dpa .

The IKA reproduces the essential physics of cluster evolution even though t he continuous 

introduction of fresh FPs in the IKA coupled with the absence of directional effects yields a higher 

overall defect concentration than the CA. In Fig. 3 a–g, the cluster size distribution show that, 

despite minor quantitative differences at very low damage, the overall evolution of clusters in IKA 

and CA becomes remarkably similar as damage increases. The fraction of clustered atoms shown 

in Fig. 3 h further confirms this point . Except for the smallest clusters (size 2 –4) and the very largest 

(>41), the cluster -size distributions in the two methods become nearly identical at high damage. 

This suggest s that once sufficient damage has developed, both IKA and CA follow similar 

mechanisms governing cluster nucleation, coalescence, and restructuring largely because the 

stored energies of the defects are similar at this point . The vacancy cluster density of 4.5×10 26 m- 

> 3

at 0.12 dpa is comparable to the 2.4×10 23 m-3 density at 0.05 strain recorded in copper 36 . This is 

~3 orders of magnitude higher because IKA results in twice as high a defect concentration than the 

CA . These similarities support the conclusion that IKA reproduces the essential physics of 

cascade -driven cluster evolution, even though it bypasses the ballistic stage .

One potential criticism of the IKA simulation approach is that fixed -volume IKA 

simulations accumulate internal stress, which may influence defect mobility and clustering. To 

identify the potential impact of such stress, we compare the defect dynamics in a stressed system 

to a similar simulation where the stress generated by Frenkel pair addition was actively relieved 

by allowing the volume to relax. Allowing the volume to relax provides a control case that reveals 

whether the intrinsic stress biases micros tructural evolution. Each stress -relaxation interval 

between consecutive IKA iterations was 35 ps for a cumulative time of 8.05 ns and up to 0.07 dpa. 

Because 35 ps is insufficient to fully relax long -wavelength stress, a residual hydrostatic stress of 30 

~3 MPa remains in the cell. We will call this method the “relaxed” system and the other simulation 

where the stress is not relieved, the “stressed” system. The dynamics of interstitial evolution are 

shown in Fig. 14a-d and results of the total defects and vacancies are shown in Fig. S6 , a-f. 

Compared to the relaxed system in Fig. 14a, the intrinsically stressed system shows a 

somewhat lower number of interstitial clusters as damage accumulates. At the same time, the 

average cluster size in Fig. 8 a and b is somewhat larger, particularly beyond 0.015 , which is 

consistent with more efficient clustering and growth under stress. We attribute this to the FP -

induced tensile stress ( Fig. S7), which expands the lattice (i.e., increases interatomic spacing), and 

hence reduces the net defect migration barrier 37 . This stress -assisted mobility promotes defect 

migration and coalescence into bigger clusters as seen in Fig.1 4b. At low damage (≤ 0.02 dpa), the 

average cluster size is indistinguishable between both cases. Beyond this point, the stressed cell 

exhibits a sharp growth, peaking at 19 atoms/cluster by 0.035 dpa versus 13 for the relaxed system 

at the same damage. By 0.07 dpa both curves plateau, with the stressed cell stabilizing near 15 

atoms/cluster and the relaxed cell near 12.5. The fraction of atoms in clusters normalized to the 

total defects sheds more light on the kinetics of clustering in both cases ( Fig. 14c). Even though 

we see that the stressed cell has higher overall average cluster size especially at higher damage 

(Fig. 14b), the fraction of atoms incorporated into clusters overall is slightly higher in the relaxed 

cell up to 0.05 dpa, beyond which they are the same. This implies that the relaxed cell contains 

more clusters of smaller size whereas FP -induced stress favors c oalescence/coarsening into fewer, 

larger clusters. 31 

Fig. 14. Comparison of the impact of stressed and stress relaxation from the IKA simulations. a) 

Number of interstitial clusters , b) Average interstitial cluster size plot for the stressed and relaxed 

systems, c) Fraction of the atoms in clusters normalized to their corresponding total defect, d) 

Fraction of isolated point defects normalized to their corresponding total defects. Plot of the total 

defects for both the stressed and relaxed systems is shown in Fig. S6 a.

Finally, Fig. 14d examine s the dynamics of isolated single point defects. The fraction of 

isolated defects decreases rapidly in both systems at very low damage and stabilizes around ~0.10 

dpa . Up to 0.025 dpa, the relaxed system maintains a marginally lower fraction of isolated defects, 

implying slightly more efficient early clustering compared to the stressed system. Greater than 

0.025 dpa, the two cases converge, consistent with the fraction of atoms in clusters plot shown in 

Fig. 14c, where both eventually saturate at similar values despite the stressed case producing 

somewhat larger clusters on average ( Fig. 14b). Together, these trends underscore the complex role 

of FP -induced accumulated stress in governing defect dynamics. Accumulated stress suppresses 

the formation of small clusters while promoting coalescence of larger clusters and sustaining a 

slightly higher fraction of point defects. These insights are critical for understanding radiation 

damage evolution in stressed environments typical of nuclear materials, where intrinsic stress 

a b

c d32 

fields arise from pre -existing microstructural features or irradiation -induced lattice distortions. 

Although stress effects measurably influence the defect statistics in IKA simulations , their 

magnitude is insufficient to justify the substantial additional computational cost associated with 

including explicit stress relaxation in the IKA. 

We next extend the discussion to the full IKA simulation up to 0.175 dpa, where the defect 

evolution can be divided into three distinct regimes with qualitatively different behavior: regime 

I, the early damage (0.00 1– 0.0 3 dpa), regime II, mid -damage (0.0 3 – 0. 09 dpa), and regime III, 

high -damage ( > 0. 09 dpa). During regime I (0.005 – 0.04 dpa), the isolated vacancy fraction 

decreases as while as the SIA fractio n (Fig. 5 c), the vacancy cluster size and fraction do not change 

much , while the interstitial cluster size and fraction increase (Fig. 6 ), and the recombination 

fraction increases (Fig. 5 a). In the l ow damage regime , the fast -moving SIAs find other interstitials 

to cluster and vacancies to recombine, but the slow -moving isolated vacancies have not yet begun 

to cluster. At slightly higher damage levels (~0.02 dpa), some of the interstitial clustering results 

in the formation of Frank loops and Shockley partials (Fig. 9a, b ), increasing both total dislocation 

line length and average segment length. No significant SF T formation occurs during this early 

stage ( Fig. 9d), underscoring that three -dimensional vacancy defects require time for the slow 

moving isolated vacancies to migrate and cluster . Nevertheless, even at these relatively low 

damage levels, incipient dislocation interactions are already developing, signaling the gradual 

transition toward extended defect –mediated microstructural evolution . Notably, the ‘stitch -and -

transform’ absorption mechanism is active during this regime, activ ating at 0.0268 dpa and 

complet ing by the end of this regime . Examination of the full dislocation -evolution sequence 

(supplementary video S1 ) clarifies this behavior: Frank loops, being interstitial -type, grow rapidly 

by absorbing fast moving SIAs, increasing in size throughout the 0.001 – 0.04 dpa range. However, 

once they reach a critical size, they become energetically unfavorable and are readily absorbed by 

the more stable Shockley loops, as illustrated in Fig. 10 a–f. This explains both the sudden reduction 

in Frank loop length and in part, the onset of cluster -size saturation observed in this damage regime .

Finally, the dominance of interstitial clustering in this regime directly translates to the observed 

mechanical response. As shown in Fig. 13, at low damage (< 0.025 dpa), hardening increases 

rapidly and is primarily governed by interstitial clusters, whos e high mobility promotes early 

clustering and efficient obstruction of dislocation motion. This behavior is consistent with a 33 

recombination -dominated regime, where only the most stable interstitial clusters persist and act as 

effective obstacles. 

In regime II ( mid -damage regime ), b etween 0.0 3 and 0. 09 dpa, the isolated vacancy 

fraction continues to decrease slowly while the SIA fraction stabilizes (Fig. 5 c), the vacancy cluster 

size and fraction and the interstitial cluster fraction increase while the interstitial cluster size 

de crease s (Fig. 6 ), and overall annihilation fraction de creases ( Fig. 5 a) whilst survival increases 

(Fig. 5 b) . The isolated vacancies have had time to migrate and cluster and to interact with 

interstitial clusters, slowing their growth. Since isolated vacancies are tied up with clusters, 

recombination slows and defect accumulation (survival) increases significantly ( Fig. 5 b). The 

decrease in the isolated vacancy fraction continues but slows throughout this regime. Consistent 

with this shift, the total dislocation line length increases across most dislocation types over this 

damage range, signaling enhanced absorption and interaction with point defects; the notable 

exception is Frank partials, which exhibit a slight but systematic reduction, suggesting their 

absorption during dislocation restructuring . This reduction is attributed to the transformations 

identified in Fig. 10 a–d and Fig. 11 a–e, where Frank partials undergo Burger’s vector changes 

from 1/3 ⟨111 ⟩ to 1/6 ⟨112 ⟩ Shockley loops . These transformations convert Frank partials into active 

sources for Shockley loop nucleation and multiplication 24,38 , thereby redistributing dislocation 

character rather than eliminating dislocation content . This regime also has a pronounced increase 

in stair -rod formation ( Fig. 9a). Stair -rod segments do not emerge at low damage but instead result 

from interactions among pre -existing dislocation loops and partials, a process that becomes 

increasingly probable once enough interstitial loops are present. Inspection of supplementary video 

S1 and Fig. 9a confirms that this transition initiates near 0.07 dpa, where loop –loop reactions and 

Burgers -vector transformations become active. As these reactions proceed, isolated vacancies and 

SIAs are absorbed, marking a transition from point -defect –production -dominated evolution to a 

dislocation -reaction –dominated regime. Concurrently, the SFT population increases, rising from 

1.2 × 10 24 m−3 at 0.0 3 dpa to  4 × 10 24 m−3 at 0. 09 dpa. The regime II ( mid -damage regime) is 

therefore characterized by defect clusters reaching stable configurations through dislocation -

mediated restructuring, while the continued introduction of FPs sustains elevated dislocation 

activity and accelerates microstructural complexity. 34 

Dislocation transformation mechanisms similar to those we show in Figs. 1 0 and 1 1 were 

observe in equiatomic multicomponent Ni -based alloys at 0.024 dpa 23 , closely matching the 

transformation and absorption events observed here at 0.027 dpa (Figs. 1 0a – d). The dislocation 

glide behavior identified in this regime is fully consistent with established slip -system physics 39 .

Mobile Shockley partials preferentially glide on densely packed {111 } planes, which are 

energetically favorable ( Fig. 15). In contrast, Frank loops are sessile and energetically unstable; 

they readily dissociate into Shockley partials and subsequently into immobile stair -rod segments. 

The accumulation of these stair -rod segments at increasing d amage progressively impedes 

Shockley partial motion, creating strong pinning points that promote their absorption and 

subsequent nucleation of SFT s which accelerate microstructural degradation ( Fig. 15). Classical 

descriptions, such as the Silcox –Hirsch model 40 , attribute SFT formation to the collapse of 

vacancy cluster into faulted Frank loops followed by dissociation into Shockley partials. Our 

simulations show similar mechanisms but also reveal an additional pathway in which SFTs form 

through the interaction and absorption of Shockley partials into stair -rod configurations. Thus, 

SFT formation proceeds via two concurrent mechanisms: vacancy collapse and dislocation -

mediated evolution. 

The reduction in recombination and the accompanying increase in defect accumulation 

directly drive the observed mechanical response in this regime, as the growing population of stable 

defect clusters increasingly impedes dislocation motion, leading to the continued rise in hardening 

(See Fig. 5a, b and Fig. 13). In this regime (~ 0.025 – 0.1 dpa), hardening continuous to increase 

primarily from three contributions thus interstitial clusters, vacancy clusters and a minor 

contribution from SFTs. This continue d rise in total hardening reflects the transition to 

accumulation -dominated behavior, where defect production exceeds recombination and both 

defect populations co -evolve to control strengthening. The dislocation partials exhibited negligible 

contribution t o hardening. 35 

Fig. 15. Schematic illustration of the irradiation -induced dislocation transformation mechanistic 

sequence in Al with accumulated damage. Here we show the evolution of damage and the 

corresponding microstructural changes as damage accumulates, from the initial for mation of 

clusters of different sizes through different loop nucleation to the formation of SFT and their 

subsequent coalescence 

In regime III ( high damage regime ), above 0. 09 dpa, the fraction of isolated vacancies 

continues to decrease slowly , SIA, vacancy clusters, and interstitial clusters and the vacancy 

cluster size are all fairly unchanging ( Fig. 4 , Fig. 5 c, Fig. 6 a, and Fig. S2). Also, both fraction of 

SIA and their an d their concentrations are fairly unchanging (Fig. 5 c and d). The average interstitial 

cluster size decreases slightly and then increase gradually, and the annihilation fraction increases 

rapidly. The increase in annihilation ( Fig. 5 a) is as a result of enhanced absorption at sink or higher 

sink strength due to enough dislocations units, not recombination. Another key microstructural 

process in this regime is the absorption of mobile Shockley partials by immobile stair -rod segments, 

leading to continued SFT formation (Figs. 11a–g). By this stage, Frank -to -Shockley 36 

transformations (Figs. 1 0 and 1 1) have largely saturated, and dislocation evolution is governed 

primarily by stair -rod –mediated reactions. This regime highlights the intrinsic coupling between 

point -defect and dislocation evolution, as defect clusters , whether interstitial or vacancy loops , are 

bound by partial dislocations and thus evolve through dislocation -mediated reactions. Consistent 

with this picture, all dislocation types except stair -rod partials remain largely stable without 

significant growth, whereas the stair -rod population continues to increase ( Fig. 9a). As Shockley 

partials are progressively absorbed, mobile defect structures are converted into immobile 

configurations, effectively suppressing further interstitial cluster growth (Fig. 6 a) and marking the 

transition to a dislocation -reaction -dominated steady -state regime .

The continued accumulation of stair -rod partials in this regime result s in an increase in SFT 

nucleation and coalescence. As a result, pronounced SFT –SFT interactions emerge, driving the 

rapid increase in SFT density from  4 × 10 24 m−3 at 0.1 dpa to  8 × 10 24 m−3 at 0.16 dpa ( Fig. 9d). 

As illustrated in Fig. 12 a–h, mobile Shockley partials continue to be absorbed by stair -rod loops ,

promoting SFT formation, while neighboring SFTs interact and coalesce into larger, “giant” SFTs 

(See Fig. 12 e and f). These merged SFTs progressively evolve toward a mature state, detaching 

from both primary and secondary dislocation networks and behaving as stable, self -contained 

defect structures (Fig. 12g and h) . Tracking individual merged SFTs across successive damage 

increments reveals that most remain isolated rather than reattaching to dislocation lines until 

eventual annihilation, although a subset of truncated SFTs remains partially bound to surrounding 

dislo cations. Consistent with this behavior, supplementary video S1 shows limited ongoing 

microstructural activity, with the dominant transformation being continued absorption of Shockley 

loops by stair -rod partials. At this regime (> 0.1 dpa), the hardening saturat es (~2.4 – 2.5 GPa), 

consistent with the onset of sink -controlled or absorption dominated regime as clearly reflected in 

Fig. 5a and b . However, hardening contribution from SFTs continues to increase , although their 

overall impact remains lower than the clusters due to their lower number density thus resulting in 

overall saturation in total hardening .

At this stage, the total bulk dislocation density reaches  1.7 × 10 17 m−2 at 0.15 dpa before 

declining to  1.4 × 10 17 m−2 by 0.175 dpa, a level characteristic of severely deformed or highly 

irradiated crystalline materials. Dislocation densities of similar magnitude have been reported in 

both extreme deformation and irradiation studies. For example, Fan et al . 41 observed dislocation 37 

densities approaching  1 × 10 17 m−2 in single -crystal Al and copper subjected to ultrahigh strain 

rates ( 𝜀 ̇ ∼ 10 9 s−1), accompanied by minimum yield stresses on the order of 10 GPa. Likewise, 

Chen et al 42 reported dislocation densities of  1.6 × 10 17 m−2 in heavily irradiated Zr –Nb 

multilayers at 0.2 dpa, while Esfandiarpour et al 43 measured densities near  10 16 m−2in irradiated 

Inconel 617. These values far exceed the dislocation densities typical of cold -worked metals 

(10 10  –10 12 m−2) and fall within the regime associated with extreme plastic deformation and 

radiation -driven microstructural collapse (  10 14  – 10 17 m−2 ) 44 . Collectively, this comparison 

demonstrates that the present approach drives the system into a damage state comparable to that 

of severely deformed crystals, reinforcing IKA capability to reproduce extreme irradiation -induced 

microstructural evolution .

In summary, we performed a systematic atomistic investigation of irradiation -induced 

microstructure evolution and degradation in single -crystal Al using the IKA benchmarked against 

conventional CA simulations. Quantitative comparison demonstrated that IKA reproduces the 

essential defect evolution kinetics and spatial defect topology observed in CA simulations, despite 

bypassing the explicit ballistic stage. At the same damage level (0.061 dpa), the interstitial pair -

correlation functions from IKA and CA showed nearly identical spatial distributions with a 

Pearson correlation coefficient of  𝑅 = 0.998  and RMSD = 0.0076, while equivalent -defect -

fraction comparisons yielded  𝑅 = 0.984 . Although IKA promotes earlier interstitial clustering and 

larger early -stage cluster coarsening, both methods converge to similar interstitial and vacancy 

cluster behavior beyond  0.048  dpa, indicating that they capture the same underlying 

microstructural evolution mechanisms while enabling substantially accelerated access to higher 

damage. 

Using the IKA, we extended irradiation damage accumulation up to 0.175 dpa and 

identified three distinct defect -evolution regimes governing microstructural evolution in Al. The 

total defect fraction increased rapidly to nearly 5% by 0.1 dpa before transitioning toward a 

dynamic steady state beyond 0.15 dpa. In the recombination -dominated regime (0.001 – 0.03 dpa), 

the annihilation fraction increased to  ∼ 29 %, driven by rapid SIA migration and clustering. 

Interstitial clusters reached average sizes of  19  atoms by 0.03 dpa, nearly seven times larger than 

vacancy clusters at the same damage. In the accumulation -dominated regime (0.03 – 0.09 dpa), 

recombination decreased to nearly zero as vacancy clustering became increasingly active and 38 

dislocation restructuring accelerated. During this stage, the total dislocation density increased to 

1.5 × 10 17 m−2 , accompanied by concurrent dislocation restructuring from  1/3⟨111 ⟩ 𝑡𝑜 1/

6⟨112 ⟩ 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑡𝑜 1/6⟨110 ⟩ transformations. In the high -damage sink -controlled regime (> 0.09 

dpa), defect absorption by extended dislocation networks dominated the evolution, while SFT 

density increased from  4 × 10 24 m−3 near 0.09 dpa to  8 × 10 24 m−3 by 0.175 dpa through 

continued Shockley partial absorption and SFT coalescence. 

Finally, the simulations further establish a direct mechanistic connection between 

microstructure evolution and hardening in Al. Interstitial loops dominated early hardening, 

contributing nearly 0.6 GPa below 0.02 dpa and increasing to  2.0 GPa by 0.1 dpa, while vacancy 

loops and SFTs contributed approximately 1.0 GPa and 0.5 GPa, respectively. Total irradiation 

hardening saturated near  2.4 – 2.5 GPa at high damage as sink absorption and dislocation -

mediated restructuring approached steady state. Overall, this work demonstrates that the IKA 

enables efficient access to high irradiation conditions while accurately capturing defect evolution 

physics f rom conventional cascade overlap simulations. 

# Methods 

The purpose of the IKA is to circumvent the high computational cost of explicitly resolving 

the ballistic regime of large numbers of displacement cascades, while establishing a direct 

correlation between the number of introduced Frenkel pairs and the incid ent ion energy. This 

accelerates damage accumulation, reaching higher damage levels than can be achieved with 

overlapping cascades. The IKA builds on several accelerated methods developed in the past. In 

this context, the conceptual idea of accelerated MD simulat ions can be traced back to the 

pioneering work of Limoge et al. 45 , who studied radiation -induced amorphization through the 

successive introduction of Frenkel pairs or isolated interstitials at octahedral sites in metallic 

systems. Their study reported that irradiation damage evolution is rate -controlled, not solely dose -

controlled, and that defect kinetics govern long -term structural evolution. This concept was later 

extended by Crocombette et al. 46 to study radiation -induced amorphization in pyrochlores using 

the Frenkel Pair Accumulation (FPA) method. Subsequent studies by Chartier et al . applied the 

FPA to investigate radiation resistance in pyrochlores 47 and irradiation -induced interstitial defect 

evolution in iron 48 . In the FPA method, an atom is displaced from its lattice site, leaving behind a 39 

vacancy and becoming an interstitial elsewhere. A vacancy –interstitial separation of 1.2 Å was 

enforced to reduce spontaneous overlap, followed by short relaxation periods of 0.5 –2 ps. 

Goryaeva et al . used the FPA to predict the metastable state of interstitial dumbbells, also known 

as the A15 Frank -Kasper phase, a source of prismatic or faulted dislocation loops in Al 49 . Other 

studies have modified this approach by introducing single self -interstitial atoms (SIAs) 

sequentially 50 .

While the extremely short evolution intervals between defect insertions in FPA -like methods 

can effectively mimic conditions where defect migration is strongly impeded (e.g., by impurities 

or solute trapping), they inherently underpredict local athermal Fr enkel -pair recombination and 

preclude long -range thermally activated defect diffusion 51 . As a result, such approaches are not 

well suited for vacancy -type defects, whose migration typically requires long -range diffusion 50 .

To address long -time defect kinetics, Aidhy et al. studied irradiation -induced point defect 

clustering in UO 2 52 and MgO 53 using a single FP -loading approach, in which a fixed defect 

concentration (1 at.%) is inserted, followed by extended thermal evolution. Hendy and Ponga 54 

developed a multiscale framework by coupling two -temperature molecular dynamics for the 

ballistic and thermal -spike stage with the Maximum -Entropy principle ( MXE ) to extend defect 

evolution to a mesoscale , allowing them to study both cascade damage and subsequent long -term 

defect migration and diffusion in nanocrystalline Ni ckel . It accounts for electronic energy 

dissipation and is useful for problems where electron -phonon coupling and post -cascade sink 

interactions are important. However, it is computationally demanding and coupling of two length 

scales could be significantly ch allenging. 

More recently, Derlet and Dudarev 55 redefined the FPA concept by introducing the creation –

relaxation algorithm (CRA) 55 . In the CRA method, an atom is randomly selected and inserted at 

a chosen location based on a probability distribution function and immediately followed by energy 

minimization. While this approach addresses data fluctuations encountered in the overlapping -

cascade regime, due to immediate minimization without defect evolution it does not treat the high -

energy component of defect production and does not permit long -range finite -temperature 

diffusion. The CRA was later modified to include spatial effects 56 . Vizoso et al. 57 combined 

explicit consecutive cascade simulations with an accelerated reduced -order atomistic cascade 

(ROAC) method to study radiation damage accumulation in gold and niobium nanostructures over 40 

a wide range of sizes and doses. In this method, ballistic defects are generated randomly by 

relocating atoms from a spherical core into a prescribed outer shell, thus introducing prescribed 

spatial correlations. A key strength of this approach is that it samples a recoil -energy spectrum 

rather than a single representative PKA energy. However, besides the computationally demanding 

nature of consecutive cascade simulations, the ROAC approximation caused inserted cas cade 

regions to interact with free surfaces in the smallest nanowire system (10 nm), requiring explicit 

PKA simulations near the surface. Moreover, the ROAC model has been reported to predict larger 

average cluster sizes than MD cascades, particularly duri ng the kinetic regime, with significantly 

higher cluster concentrations at the cell centroid (see original work 58 )

Most existing accelerated methods discussed herein generally assume that added Frenkel pairs 

are uncorrelated with the incident ion energy, resulting in arbitrary number of inserted FPs. 

Consequently, direct comparison with experimental irradiation studies is challenging, as the 

absolute damage produced by accelerated MD methods cannot be quantitatively related to 

experiments due to the absence of a defined incident ion energy 19 . The IKA is modeled on the 

premise that cascade evolution consists of ballistic and kinetic stages 17 , with residual defects from 

the ballistic stage governing subsequent kinetic processes. To bypass the costly ballistic stage, we 

use FP seeds calibrated from independent single -cascade simulations that account for athermal 

recombination corrected displace ments per atom(arc -dpa) to correct overestimates from the 

traditional Norgett –Robinson –Torrens -dpa (NRT -dpa). Each inserted FP seed therefore represents 

one explicit cascade event corresponding to a well -defined incident ion energy, enabling direct 

comparison with experimental irradiation conditions while simultaneously acceleratin g damage 

accumulation. This makes IKA computationally efficient and yields comparable damage levels 

with defect morphologies and topologies similar to the traditional cascade -overlap simulations. 

The rest of this section focuses on describing the setup for the IKA methodology. However, to 

provide appropriate context, we first briefly discuss the more familiar methodology for the single 

and multiple cascades that are applied in this work to benchmar k the IKA’s accuracy. 

The Cascade Simulation: 

All MD simulations in this work, including both single and multiple collision cascade -overlap 

simulations, are performed using the LAMMPS code 59 . A PKA with energy of 5 keV, 41 

corresponding to a 50 keV helium ion incident energy as calculated by the SRIM code 60 –62 , is 

used. The PKA energy is estimated according to the guidelines provided by Stoller et al 63 . We 

construct the crystal with crystallographic orientations of [021], [0 1ˉ 2], and [100] aligned along the 

x, y, and z axes, respectively, to mimic the crystallographic orientation used in our ongoing 

bicrystal simulations. The simulation domain measures 14.5 nm × 21.7 nm × 14.5 nm and contains 

276,480 Al atoms. Based on previous studies that observed SFT formation and evolution in a 

significantly smaller systems, t he present simulation cell is sufficiently large enough to capture the 

formation and evolution of SFTs 27 . Similarly, although dislocation loops can in principle interact 

with their periodic images under periodic boundary conditions, the present cell size is sufficiently 

large to minimize such interactions such that they do not significantly influence the resul ts. To 

identify the most suitable interatomic potential, we calculate the root mean error between the 

predicted stacking fault energies and elastic constants for 32 candidate potentials documented in 

OPENKIM 64 and compare these results with experimental data reported by Noonon and Davis 65 

and Kamm and Alers 66 . Through this analysis, we select an embedded atom method (EAM) 

potential developed by Mishin 67 , as its elastic constants and stacking fault energies exhibit the 

lowest error with experimental values. This potential is well established and recognized for its 

accurate prediction of point and planar defects in FCC metals 68 –70 . The structure is initially 

equilibrated at 300 K and zero pressure for 50 ps using the NPT ensemble, allowing the simulation 

box dimensions to fully relax. This is followed by an additional 450 ps of equilibration under the 

NVT ensemble, bringing the tot al equilibration time to 500 ps. This is sufficient to eliminate any 

residual stress in the system. 

In the cascade simulation, we start with a well relaxed structure and randomly selected 

atom at the bottom center and give the atom velocity along the y direction equivalent to 5 keV of 

kinetic energy, as shown in Fig. 1 6. To capture short -range high energy interactions, we couple the 

EMA potential with the ZBL screened nuclear repulsion potential to screen high -energy collisions. 

The ZBL potential is applied at interatomic distances at ≤ 0.7 Å. The structure is then minim ized 

briefly using the conjugate gradient algorithm at zero pressure before the next cascade. The 

Langevin thermostat is used to control the temperature by applying frictional damping and random 

forces to atoms found within a 4 Å layer at all boundaries, w hich is thick enough to bring the 

system temperature back to the desired 300K. 42 

Fig. 16. Schematic of the PKA simulation box with x, y, and z directions corresponding to the [100], 

[021], and [0 1ˉ 2] crystallographic directions. The bottom circles show the PKA region and the red 

arrow shows the direction of movement for the PKA. The IKA simulation cell has the same setup 

except that it does not involve the PKA region and direction defined here 

An adaptive time -step control is applied to ensure limited atomic displacements per step and to 

maintain numerical stability. Specifically, the dynamic timestep is set from 1.0 × 10⁻⁶ ps, to 1.0 × 

10⁻³ ps with a maximum atom displacement threshold of 0.05 Å for the first 1 -2 ps; thereafter, a 

timestep of 1.0 × 10⁻³ ps is applied in the microcanonical ensemble (NVE). This prevents any 

unphysical atom overlaps or instabilities that can arise from large atomic velocities immediately 

after the PKA initiation. Periodic boundary conditions are applied in all three directions to mimic 

in infinitely large system. Finally, each cascade is allowed a maximum time of 35 ps to evolve 

before the next overlap. 

Iterative Kinetic Approach (IKA) 

For the IKA simulations, we use the same equilibrated structure with the same box dimensions 

as used in the cascade -overlap simulations described earlier . To calibrate the IKA simulation, we 

estimate the number of stable Frenkel pairs from the single cascade using the athermal 

recombination -corrected dpa (arc -dpa) using the equation 

𝑁 𝑑 = ξ× 𝑁 𝑁𝑅𝑇 , (2)

[100] 

[021] 

[0 1ˉ 2] 43 

where ξ is the defect production efficiency factor, defined as the ratio of the actual number of stable 

defects to that predicted by the NRT model 4. The efficiency factor ξ is given as 

ξ(𝐸 𝑎 ) =  1−𝐶    

> (2𝐸 𝑑 0.8⁄)𝑏

𝐸 𝑎  

> 𝑏

+ 𝑐 , (3)

where Ea and Ed are the damage energy and the threshold displacement energies, respectively. We 

use a value of 24 eV for Ed which is a typical threshold displacement energy for metals 71 . The 

parameters b and c are constants with values b = -0.453 and c = 0.481 from the works of Yin et al 

> 72

. The arc -dpa estimated from the single cascade simulation resulted in 45 FPs. This number is 

therefore used as the FP “seed” in the IKA simulations. In each IKA iteration, 45 vacancies 

randomly located in the simulation cell are created and 45 interstitia ls are inserted at different 

random positions, representing the defect yield of one 5 keV cascade. After each FP insertion, the 

system is minimized to reach local energy minima and then evolved for 35 ps using two 

thermostatted regions, a 4 Å outer boundary layer, which is coupled to a Langevin thermostat to 

act as a heat sink, and an inner region, under a Nose –Hoover thermostat (NVT). This setup mimics 

the thermal response of cascade simulations by allowing localized overheatin g inside the cell while 

removing excess heat at the boundaries. Each iteration mimics a single cascade. Finally, to prevent 

unphysical atomic overlap, a 1.5 Å initial separation between inserted interstitial atoms and any 

other atoms was found ideal. This is slightly larger than the 1.2 Å separation commonly used in 

other accelerated -damage methods 51 . Finally, we estimate the cumulative damage displacement 

per atom (dpa) produced using the Norgett -Robinson -Torrens (NRT) equation but slightly 

modified to account for cumulative damage effect 32 . It is given as 

Damage (dpa ) = 0.8𝑇 𝑑  

> 2𝐸 𝑑 𝑁

𝑁 𝐼𝐾𝐴  (4)

where N is the number of atoms in the simulation,  𝑁 𝐼𝐾𝐴  is the number of iterations, and  𝑇 𝑑  is the 

damage energy calculated from SRIM. We can also compute the effective damage/dose rate from 

the damage increment per IKA event using 

Δ𝐷 = 𝑁 𝐹𝑃 

> 𝑁 𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑠

(5) 

Where, ΔD is the damage increment per each IKA event,  𝑁 𝐹𝑃  is the number of inserted Frenkel 

pairs per IKA event,  𝑁 𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑠  is the total atoms in the simulation cell. Therefore, 44 

Δ𝐷 = 45  

> 276480

= 1.6276 × 10 −4 𝑑𝑝𝑎  (6) 

Since each IKA event was allowed a 35 ps evolution ( 35 × 10 −12 𝑠 ). The effective damage rate 

in the IKA simulations  (𝐷 𝐼𝐾𝐴 ) is 

𝐷 𝐼𝐾𝐴 = 1.6276 ×10 −4 𝑑𝑝𝑎    

> 35 ×10 −12 𝑠

= 4.65 × 10 6 𝑑𝑝𝑎 𝑠 −1 (7) 

Quantitative irradiation hardening 

The irradiation -induced hardening was estimated using the DBH model, which is widely applied 

to irradiation damage in metals 73,74 . For discrete three -dimensional defects such as clusters and 

SFTs, the DBH model expresses the yield strength increment as a function of obstacle size and 

number density: 

∆𝜎 𝑖 = 𝑀 𝛼 𝑖 𝜇𝑏 √𝑁 𝑖 𝑑 𝑖  (8)

where  Δ𝜎 𝑖  is the strengthening increment (increase in yield stress) due to obstacle type  𝑖 . 𝑀  is the 

Taylor factor, which is the shear stresses on a slip plane in a single crystal to the applied tensile 

stress required to activate slip in a polycrystal ; for single -crystal Al,  𝑀 = 3.06  75 . 𝛼 𝑖  is the obstacle 

strength factor representing how effectively that defect impedes free dislocation motion . We 

assumed 0.1 – 0.5 for different obstacles strengths which is within close range with the values used 

in Arsenlis et al . 76 . 𝜇  is the shear modulus ( 𝜇 = 26  GPa for Al), and  𝑏  is the Burgers vector 

magnitude. For clusters,  𝑏 ≈ 0.286  nm, while for Shockley, Frank, and stair -rod dislocations 

(associated with SFTs), the corresponding magnitudes  0.165 , 0.234 , and  0.117  nm were used, 

respectively.  𝑁 𝑖  is the number density of obstacles (𝑚 −3), and  𝑑 𝑖  is their characteristic size (𝑚 ). 𝑖 

is the index denoting a specific defect type , e.g., SFTs, vacancy clusters, interstitial clusters, or 

dislocation loops. For vacancy and interstitial clusters, the mean diameter was estimated from the 

cluster volume using  𝑉 = 𝑛 Ω, where  𝑛  is the cluster size and  Ω is the atomic volume. Assuming 

spherical geometry, the equivalent diameter was obtained as 

𝑑 = 2 (3𝑛 Ω 

> 4𝜋

) 

> 13⁄

(9)

In contrast, for dislocation loops and line defects, the obstacle population is more appropriately 

described by the dislocation density  𝜌 𝑖 , defined as the total line length per unit volume (𝑚 −2),45 

which inherently incorporates both the number and spatial extent of the obstacles as was previously 

defined 76 . Their contribution to hardening is therefore expressed as 

∆𝜎 𝑖 = 𝑀 𝛼 𝑖 𝜇𝑏 √𝑝 𝑖  (10 )

where all parameters retain their definitions given above. For the dislocation contribution, only 

Shockley and Frank loops were considered as other dislocation types (e.g., perfect, Hirth, and 

others) contribute negligibly to the overall dislocation density. Although the total dislocation 

density could be used directly, this would lead to double counting because SFTs are composed of 

stair -ro d dislocations, and their characteristic size is derived from the stair -rod edge length (i.e., 

the average segment length of stair -rod partials). To avoid this, the hardening contribution was 

decomposed by defect type. The total hardening is therefore take n as the root -sum -square 

superposition 77 of the individual contributions from each defect type in Eq. ( 11 )

∆𝜎 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = √(∆𝜎 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑠 )2 + (∆𝜎 𝑣𝑎𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑠 )2 + (∆𝜎 𝑆𝐹𝑇𝑠 )2 + (∆𝜎 𝑆 ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑙𝑒𝑦 )2 + (∆𝜎 𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 )2 (11 )

Damage Analysis and Outlook 

All post -simulation data processing and analysis are performed using Python and a suite of 

algorithms and tools available within the Open Visualization Tool (OVITO) 78 . For point defect 

analysis, we employ the Wigner -Seitz cell algorithm 79 , which offers the key advantage of a space -

filling approach: each point in space is uniquely assigned to its nearest lattice site, eliminating the 

need for arbitrary cutoff distances as required in methods like Common Neighbor Analysis (CNA). 

A well equil ibrated reference configuration is used for defect identification, and all reported data 

is based on averages from two independent simulations to ensure statistical reliability. We did not 

find the difference to be significantly different to justify the cost of conducting more than two 

independent simulations. Defects clusters are determined using a combination of the Wigner -Seitz 

cell algorithm 79 and the cluster analysis algorithm with a cutoff threshold of 3.2 Å. 

Dislocations are characterized using the Dislocation Extraction Algorithm (DXA) 80 . DXA 

provides a robust, automated framework for identifying dislocation lines, dislocation cores, and 

readily classifying and outputting their corresponding Burgers vectors and types. In addition to the 

quantitative analysis of damage evolution presented in the sections below, the Supplementary 46 

Material (SM) includes movies illustrating the evolution of dislocation networks and their 

transformations throughout the simulations. 

In t he following section , we discuss the limitations of the current study. In the current IKA 

implementation, localized spatial correlations arising from thermal spikes and subcascade 

formation are not explicitly considered. The PKA energy examined here lies below the established 

subcascade threshold in metals (10 –20 keV) 4,81,82 . Additionally, another simplification of the 

present IKA framework is that each IKA step is treated as a single representative PKA event rather 

than an ensemble of cascade events from a recoil -energy spectrum, as adopted in previous studies 

> 57,58

. Together with the 35 ps relaxation interval between events, this yields an effective damage 

rate on the order of ~10 6, which remains above experimental irradiation rates (~10 -5–10 -3 dpa/s )

but is lower than several previously reported accelerated atomistic methods, including FPA, the 

creation –relaxation algorithm, and ROAC 55,58,83 . This limitation, however, is not unique to IKA, 

but reflects a broader challenge of atomistic radiation -damage simulations 57,84 . Such high damage 

rates, as employed in the IKA approach and other MD cascade -overlap simulations, generate 

defects much faster than thermally activated recovery processes can operate under experimental 

conditions. Consequently, defect supersaturation and e arly -stage clustering may be enhanced 

relative to experiments, while long -range diffusion -mediated recovery mechanisms are reduced. 

Although this may accelerate the absolute kinetics and alter defect densities compared to low -

dose -rate irradiation experime nts, the underlying defect evolution pathways are generally expected 

to be preserved. Furthermore , the time allowed for inter -event diffusion (i.e., between successive 

IKA steps) is tunable in this approach. The interval of 35 ps, is designed to mimic the timescale 

over which an individual cascade evolves and cools down, which helps alleviate unrealistic defect 

accumulation by allowing local recombination and short -range defect rearrangements between 

damage events . Researchers interested in long term diffusive kinetics should refer to multiscale 

models that incorporates diffusion kinetics 54 or single FP -loading methods 85 

The introduction of artificial FPs, rather than explicit MD cascade overlaps, results in a 

slightly lower per -atom energy, decreasing from ~ −0.03 eV at 0.01 dpa to ~ −0.01 eV at 0.07 dpa 

[see our earlier work 86 . This may promote the formation of larger average clusters through reduced 

average atom –atom spacing, consistent with Fig. 2c. However, as damage accumulates, the 

difference progressively diminishes as the cascades stabilize. We considered only single -cry stal 47 

Al in the present study under room temperature (considered as 300K in this study ). Also, exploring 

the impact of annealing at different temperatures will be something worth considering in the future. 

Further details of the IKA methodology and implementation are provided in our previous work 86 48 

# Acknowledgements. 

We want to thank Dr. Brandon Scott Battas for useful discussions and editorial contributions. This 

research was funded by the United State Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Basic Energy 

Science Grant number DE -SC0024249 .

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

ASI: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Validation, Software, 

Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. SW: Writing –

review & editing . VY: Writing – review & editing. AA: Writing – review & editing , Funding 

acquisition MRT: Writing – review & editing , Supervision, Funding acquisition, Project 

Administration. SRP : Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition, 

Methodology, Project Administration . All authors reviewed and confirmed the manuscript. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors declare no competing financial or non -financial interests. 

Data availability 

All supporting data for this article are included in the supplementary materials ( SM) . All 

correspondence should be directed at Michael R Tonks and Simon R Phillpot 

Code Availability 

Codes will be made available upon reasonable request .49 

References 

1. Gregory, B. L. & Gwyn, C. W. Radiation effects on semiconductor devices. Proc. IEEE 62 ,

1264 –1273 (1974). 

2. Holmes -Siedle, A. Radiation damage in semiconductor materials. Nature 280 , 176 –176 

(1979). 

3. Li, S. et al. Development and applications of aluminum alloys for aerospace industry. J. 

Mater. Res. Technol. 27 , 944 –983 (2023). 

4. Nordlund, K. et al. Primary radiation damage: A review of current understanding and 

models. J. Nucl. Mater. 512 , 450 –479 (2018). 

5. Hasa, M. H. A. et al. Review of the development and application of aluminum alloys in 

the nuclear industry. Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci. 64 , (2025). 

6. Woolstenhulme, N. E. et al. Irradiation performance of a U -7Mo in Al -Si matrix dispersion 

full -size fuel plate assembly. Nucl. Eng. Des. 416 , 112761 (2024). 

7. Kim, H. -J., Yim, J. -S., Tahk, Y. -W., Oh, J. -Y. & Kong, E. -H. Drop behaviors of a plate -type 

fuel assembly used in research reactor for a drop accident. Prog. Nucl. Energy 113 , 255 –

262 (2019). 

8. Al Hasa, M. H. et al. Review of the development and application of aluminum alloys in 

the nuclear industry. Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci. 64 , 20250122 (2025). 

9. Busby, J. T., Nanstad, R. K., Stoller, R. E., Feng, Z. & Naus, D. J. Materials Degradation in 

Light Water Reactors: Life After 60, ORNL/TM -2008/170, 938766 

http://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/938766 -MT7kYw/ (2008) doi:10.2172/938766. 

10. Shepelyev, O., Sekimura, N. & Abe, H. Diffusion and conversion of interstitial dumbbells 

in segregated ternary alloys under irradiation. J. Nucl. Mater. 329 –333 , 1204 –1207 (2004). 

11. Verbiest, E. & Pattyn, H. Study of radiation damage in aluminum. Phys. Rev. B 25 , 5097 –

5121 (1982). 

12. Silcox, J. & Whelan, M. J. Direct observations of the annealing of prismatic dislocation 

loops and of climb of dislocations in quenched aluminium. Philos. Mag. J. Theor. Exp. 

Appl. Phys. 5, 1 –23 (1960). 

13. Zhu, H. et al. The formation and accumulation of radiation -induced defects and the role 

of lamellar interfaces in radiation damage of titanium aluminum alloy irradiated with Kr -

ions at room temperature. Acta Mater. 195 , 654 –667 (2020). 

14. Zhang, X. et al. Radiation effects on microstructure and hardening behavior in high -

entropy fiber strengthened Al -based alloy. J. Alloys Compd. 1034 , 181244 (2025). 

15. Satoh, Y., Yoshiie, T., Mori, H. & Kiritani, M. Formation of stacking -fault tetrahedra in 

aluminum irradiated with high -energy particles at low -temperatures. Phys. Rev. B 69 ,

094108 (2004). 50 

16. Chen, Y. et al. Heavy ion irradiation effects on CrFeMnNi and AlCrFeMnNi high entropy 

alloys. J. Nucl. Mater. 574 , 154163 (2023). 

17. Aidhy, D. S. et al. Point defect evolution in Ni, NiFe and NiCr alloys from atomistic 

simulations and irradiation experiments. Acta Mater. 99 , 69 –76 (2015). 

18. Goryaeva, A. M. et al. Compact A15 Frank -Kasper nano -phases at the origin of 

dislocation loops in face -centred cubic metals. Nat. Commun. 14 , 3003 (2023). 

19. Da Fonseca, D. et al. Evidence of dislocation loop preferential nucleation in irradiated 

aluminum under stress. Scr. Mater. 233 , 115510 (2023). 

20. Jourdan, T., Goryaeva, A. M. & Marinica, M. -C. Preferential Nucleation of Dislocation 

Loops under Stress Explained by A15 Frank -Kasper Nanophases in Aluminum. Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 132 , 226101 (2024). 

21. Wang, R. et al. Molecular dynamics simulation of effects of Al on the evolution of 

displacement cascades in Al CoCrFeNi high entropy alloys. J. Nucl. Mater. 577 , 154342 

(2023). 

22. Tawara, T., Matsukawa, Y. & Kiritani, M. Defect structure of gold introduced by high -speed 

deformation. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 350 , 70 –75 (2003). 

23. Levo, E., Granberg, F., Fridlund, C., Nordlund, K. & Djurabekova, F. Radiation damage 

buildup and dislocation evolution in Ni and equiatomic multicomponent Ni -based alloys. 

J. Nucl. Mater. 490 , 323 –332 (2017). 

24. Ma, K. et al. Decoding the interstitial/vacancy nature of dislocation loops with their 

morphological fingerprints in face -centered cubic structure. Sci. Adv. 11 , eadq4070 

(2025). 

25. Levo, E., Granberg, F., Nordlund, K. & Djurabekova, F. Temperature effect on irradiation 

damage in equiatomic multi -component alloys. Comput. Mater. Sci. 197 , 110571 (2021). 

26. Schäublin *, R., Yao ,Z., Baluc ,N. & and Victoria, M. Irradiation -induced stacking fault 

tetrahedra in fcc metals. Philos. Mag. 85 , 769 –777 (2005). 

27. Aidhy, D. S. et al. Formation and growth of stacking fault tetrahedra in Ni via vacancy 

aggregation mechanism. Scr. Mater. 114 , 137 –141 (2016). 

28. Uberuaga, B., Hoagland, R., Voter, A. & Valone, S. Direct Transformation of Vacancy Voids 

to Stacking Fault Tetrahedra. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99 , 135501 (2007). 

29. Zhang, L., Lu, C., Michal, G., Deng, G. & Tieu, K. The formation and destruction of stacking 

fault tetrahedron in fcc metals: A molecular dynamics study. Scr. Mater. 136 , 78 –82 

(2017). 

30. Daghbouj, N. et al. Asymmetrical defect sink behavior of HCP/BCC Zr/Nb multilayer 

interfaces: Bubble -denuded zones at Nb layers. Acta Mater. 301 , 121579 (2025). 

31. Daghbouj, N. et al. Nanoscale Strain Evolution and Grain Boundary -Mediated Defect 

Sink Behavior in Irradiated SiC: Insights from N -PED and DFT. Acta Mater. 303 , 121739 

(2026). 51 

32. Wei, G. et al. Revealing the critical role of vanadium in radiation damage of tungsten -

based alloys. Acta Mater. 274 , 119991 (2024). 

33. Granberg, F., Byggmästar, J. & Nordlund, K. Molecular dynamics simulations of high -

dose damage production and defect evolution in tungsten. J. Nucl. Mater. 556 , 153158 

(2021). 

34. Nes, E., Marthinsen, K. & Brechet, Y. On the mechanisms of dynamic recovery. Scr. Mater. 

47 , 607 –611 (2002). 

35. Szökefalvi -Nagy, A., Radnoczi, G. & Gaal, I. Stage IV recovery in deformed tungsten. Mater. 

Sci. Eng. 93 , 39 –43 (1987). 

36. Dai, Y. & Victoria, M. Defect structures in deformed f.c.c. metals. Acta Mater. 45 , 3495 –

3501 (1997). 

37. Yang, W. & Wu, Y. Effects of annealing on the micro -internal stress induced by interstitial 

defects in aluminum crystal by molecular dynamics simulations. AIP Adv. 12 , 025226 

(2022). 

38. Anderson PM, Hirth JP & Lothe J. Theory of Dislocations . 3rd edn. Cambridge University 

Press (2017) .

39. Mayer, A. E., Krasnikov, V. S. & Pogorelko, V. V. Dislocation nucleation in Al single crystal 

at shear parallel to (111) plane: Molecular dynamics simulations and nucleation theory 

with artificial neural networks. Int. J. Plast. 139 , 102953 (2021). 

40. Silcox, J. & Hirsch, P. B. Direct observations of defects in quenched gold. Philos. Mag. 4,

72 –89 (1959). 

41. Fan, H., Wang, Q., El -Awady, J. A., Raabe, D. & Zaiser, M. Strain rate dependency of 

dislocation plasticity. Nat. Commun. 12 , 1845 (2021). 

42. Chen, E. Y., Deo, C. & Dingreville, R. Irradiation resistance of nanostructured interfaces 

in Zr –Nb metallic multilayers. J. Mater. Res. 34 , 2239 –2251 (2019). 

43. Esfandiarpour, A. et al. Characterizing the radiation -induced defect behavior in Inconel 

617 through molecular dynamics simulations. J. Nucl. Mater. 616 , 156019 (2025). 

44. Recovery, recrystallization & grain growth - NFPL139: Physics of Materials II. 

45. Limoge, Y., Rahman, A., Hsieh, H. & Yip, S. Computer simulation studies of radiation 

induced amorphization. J. Non -Cryst. Solids 99 , 75 –88 (1988). 

46. Crocombette, J. -P., Chartier, A. & Weber, W. J. Atomistic simulation of amorphization 

thermokinetics in lanthanum pyrozirconate. Appl. Phys. Lett. 88 , 051912 (2006). 

47. Chartier, A., Catillon, G. & Crocombette, J. -P. Key Role of the Cation Interstitial Structure 

in the Radiation Resistance of Pyrochlores. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 , 155503 (2009). 

48. Chartier, A. & Marinica, M. -C. Rearrangement of interstitial defects in alpha -Fe under 

extreme condition. Acta Mater. 180 , 141 –148 (2019). 

49. Goryaeva, A. M. et al. Compact A15 Frank -Kasper nano -phases at the origin of 

dislocation loops in face -centred cubic metals. Nat. Commun. 14 , 3003 (2023). 52 

50. Monasterio, P. R., Yip, S. & Yildiz, B. Self -interstitial clusters in radiation damage 

accumulation: coupled molecular dynamics and metadynamics simulations. Eur. Phys. 

J. B 86 , 118 (2013). 

51. Chartier, A. & Marinica, M. -C. Rearrangement of interstitial defects in alpha -Fe under 

extreme condition. Acta Mater. 180 , 141 –148 (2019). 

52. Aidhy, D. S., Millett, P. C., Desai, T., Wolf, D. & Phillpot, S. R. Kinetically evolving 

irradiation -induced point defect clusters in UO 2 by molecular dynamics simulation. 

Phys. Rev. B 80 , 104107 (2009). 

53. Aidhy, D. S., Millett, P. C., Wolf, D., Phillpot, S. R. & Huang, H. Kinetically driven point -

defect clustering in irradiated MgO by molecular -dynamics simulation. Scr. Mater. 60 ,

691 –694 (2009). 

54. Hendy, M. & Ponga, M. A multiscale and multiphysics framework to simulate radiation 

damage in nano -crystalline materials. J. Nucl. Mater. 578 , 154347 (2023). 

55. Derlet, P. M. Microscopic structure of a heavily irradiated material. Phys. Rev. Mater. 4,

(2020). 

56. Mansouri, E. & Olsson, P. Modeling of irradiation -induced microstructure evolution in Fe: 

Impact of Frenkel pair distribution. Comput. Mater. Sci. 236 , 112852 (2024). 

57. Vizoso, D. et al. Size -dependent radiation damage mechanisms in nanowires and 

nanoporous structures. Acta Mater. 215 , 117018 (2021). 

58. Chen, E. Y., Deo, C. & Dingreville, R. Reduced -order atomistic cascade method for 

simulating radiation damage in metals. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 32 , 045402 (2019). 

59. Thompson, A. P. et al. LAMMPS - a flexible simulation tool for particle -based materials 

modeling at the atomic, meso, and continuum scales. Comput. Phys. Commun. 271 ,

108171 (2022). 

60. Ziegler, J. F., Ziegler, M. D. & Biersack, J. P. SRIM – The stopping and range of ions in matter 

(2010). Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B Beam Interact. Mater. At. 268 , 1818 –

1823 (2010). 

61. Daghbouj, N. et al. Defect landscape engineering suppresses helium damage in 

ceramics. Commun. Mater. 7, 97 (2026). 

62. Daghbouj, N. et al. Microstructure evolution of iron precipitates in (Fe, He) -irradiated 6H -

SiC: A combined TEM and multiscale modeling. J. Nucl. Mater. 584 , 154543 (2023). 

63. Stoller, R. E. et al. On the use of SRIM for computing radiation damage exposure. Nucl. 

Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B Beam Interact. Mater. At. 310 , 75 –80 (2013). 

64. Tadmor, E. B., Elliott, R. S., Sethna, J. P., Miller, R. E. & Becker, C. A. The potential of 

atomistic simulations and the knowledgebase of interatomic models. JOM 63 , 17 –17 

(2011). 

65. Noonan, J. R. & Davis, H. L. Truncation -induced multilayer relaxation of the A1(110) 

surface. Phys. Rev. B 29 , 4349 –4355 (1984). 53 

66. Kamm, G. N. & Alers, G. A. Low -Temperature Elastic Moduli of Aluminum. J. Appl. Phys. 

35 , 327 –330 (1964). 

67. Mishin, Y. Atomistic modeling of the γ and γ′ -phases of the Ni –Al system. Acta Mater. 52 ,

1451 –1467 (2004). 

68. Chen, C., Qin, D., Wang, Y., Xu, F. & Song, J. Molecular dynamics simulations of 

interaction between a super edge dislocation and interstitial dislocation loops in 

irradiated L12Ni3Al. J. Nucl. Mater. 605 , 155541 (2025). 

69. Nandipati, G., Senor, D. J., Casella, A. M. & Soulami, A. Molecular dynamics study of 

interstitial He clusters in nickel. Nucl. Mater. Energy 41 , 101733 (2024). 

70. Anis, G., Hudson, T. & Brommer, P. Dislocation dynamics in Ni: Parameterizing 

dislocation trajectories from atomistic simulations. Phys. Rev. Mater. 8, 123604 (2024). 

71. Anderson, S., Khafizov, M. & Chernatynskiy, A. Threshold displacement energies and 

primary radiation damage in AlN from molecular dynamics simulations. Nucl. Instrum. 

Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B Beam Interact. Mater. At. 547 , 165228 (2024). 

72. Yin, W., Zu, T. & Cao, L. Application of Athermal Recombination Corrected Dpa Model In 

Nuclear Data Processing Code Necp -Atlas. EPJ Web Conf. 247 , 09021 (2021). 

73. Beck, M. S. & Iowa State Univ. of Science and Technology, A. (USA). Dispersed barrier 

hardening in irradiated metals. https://inis.iaea.org/records/ck1pw -t1277 (1978). 

74. Chen, X. et al. Dispersed barrier hardening modeling on depth -distributed helium 

bubbles in iron -based alloys. J. Nucl. Mater. 606 , 155608 (2025). 

75. Stoller, R. E. & Zinkle, S. J. On the relationship between uniaxial yield strength and 

resolved shear stress in polycrystalline materials. J. Nucl. Mater. 283 –287 , 349 –352 

(2000). 

76. Arsenlis, A., Rhee, M., Hommes, G., Cook, R. & Marian, J. A dislocation dynamics study 

of the transition from homogeneous to heterogeneous deformation in irradiated body -

centered cubic iron. Acta Mater. 60 , 3748 –3757 (2012). 

77. Analysis of Obstacle Hardening Models Using Dislocation Dynamics: Application to 

Irradiation -Induced Defects | Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A | Springer 

Nature Link. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11661 -015 -2935 -z. 

78. Stukowski, A. Visualization and analysis of atomistic simulation data with OVITO –the 

Open Visualization Tool. Model. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 18 , 015012 (2009). 

79. Nordlund, K. et al. Defect production in collision cascades in elemental semiconductors 

and fcc metals. Phys. Rev. B 57 , 7556 –7570 (1998). 

80. Stukowski, A., Bulatov, V. V. & Arsenlis, A. Automated identification and indexing of 

dislocations in crystal interfaces. Model. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 20 , 085007 (2012). 

81. Muroga, T., Kitajima, K. & Ishino, S. The effect of recoil energy spectrum on cascade 

structures and defect production efficiencies. J. Nucl. Mater. 133 –134 , 378 –382 (1985). 54 

82. Stoller, R. E. Primary Radiation Damage Formation. Compr. Nucl. Mater. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/B978 -0-08 -056033 -5.00027 -6 (2012) doi:10.1016/B978 -0-08 -

056033 -5.00027 -6. 

83. Crocombette, J. -P., Chartier, A. & Weber, W. J. Atomistic simulation of amorphization 

thermokinetics in lanthanum pyrozirconate. Appl. Phys. Lett. 88 , 051912 (2006). 

84. Markelj, S. et al. Unveiling the radiation -induced defect production and damage 

evolution in tungsten using multi -energy Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy in 

channeling configuration. Acta Mater. 263 , 119499 (2024). 

85. Aidhy, D. S., Millett, P. C., Desai, T., Wolf, D. & Phillpot, S. R. Kinetically evolving 

irradiation -induced point defect clusters in UO 2 by molecular dynamics simulation. 

Phys. Rev. B 80 , 104107 (2009). 

86. Issaka, A. S. et al. Cascade -informed accelerated simulation of complex defect 

structures in irradiated aluminum using iterative kinetic approach. Mater. Lett. 414 ,

140572 (2026).