Title: 2606.26019v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.26019v1

Published Time: Thu, 25 Jun 2026 01:14:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
1

# Primary damage and mechanical  degradation  of WTaCrV  refractory 

# high -entropy alloy:  effects  of solid -solution and chemical order ing 

Yihan Wu 1, *  Pengfei Yu 1 Yaohong Suo 1 Lei Zhang 2,  * 

> 1

School of Mechanical Engineering and Automation , Fuzhou University,  Fuzhou,  PR China  

> 2

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology , P.O. Box 513 ,

5600, MB , Eindhoven , the Netherlands 

> *

Corresponding authors: 

wuyihan@fzu.edu.cn  (Y Wu),  l.zhang9 @tue .nl  (L Zhang )

Abstract:  As advanced nuclear reactors demand  novel  irradiation -tolerant materials, this study 

investigates the radiation damage and mechanical degradation of the promising WTaCrV refractory 

high -entropy alloy  (RHEA) . To  isolate  complex nanoscale chemical effects, we propose a n

atomistic modeling strategy comparing Average -Atom (AA), random solid -solution (RSS), and 

local chemical order (LCO) configurations using newly developed  interatomic potential s. Collision 

cascades  simulations reveal  that  the number of  Frenkel pairs  follow  NRSS  > NLCO  > NAA  at the same 

radiation dose . While the RSS effect accelerates defect  generation  due to  rugged energy landscape s,

LCO enhances lattice cohesion to  mitigate  radiation damage . Despite more primary defects  in the 

RSS and LCO configurations  compared with the AA configurations, the RSS and LCO effects  can 

suppress  radiation -induced mechanical  degradation . Irr adiation  severely degrade the homogenized 

AA model but exert a  limited  impact on the strength and flow stress of the RSS and LCO model s. 

This exceptional resistance is driven by inherent lattice distortion  resulting from interactions among 

different  alloy elements , which outweighs  point  defect  induced  lattice  disruptions . Moreover,  the 

complex interactions  between deformation twins and point defects cause confined plastic flow, 

elevating flow stress in the RSS and LCO models . The findings  provide  atomistic  guidance for 

performance assessment  of next -generation structural materials for  extreme nuclear environments. 2

Keywords : Refractory high -entropy alloy ; Random solid -solution; Local chemical order ;

Collision cascade;  Interatomic potential 

1.  Introduction 

As the global demand for sustainable and low -carbon energy intensifies, advanced nuclear 

reactor systems are being pushed toward unprecedented operational extremes, including higher 

temperatures and more intense neutron irradiation environments  [1, 2] . Traditional nuclear structural 

materials are rapidly approaching their performance limits under these severe conditions, 

necessitating the urgent development of next -generation irradiation -tolerant materials. Refractory 

high -entropy alloys (RHEAs), chara cterized by multi -principal elements with high melting points, 

have emerged as promising candidates owing to their inherent lattice distortion, sluggish diffusion, 

and the synergistic cocktail effect  [3, 4] . Among them, the WTaCrV alloy stands out for its 

exceptional phase stability, remarkable high -temperature strength, and immense potential for 

irradiation resistance, making it uniquely positioned to tackle challenges in advanced nuclear 

energy engineering  [5 -8] .

Despite its  tempting  macroscopic properties, the underlying  nanoscopic  mechanisms 

governing the irradiation damage and mechanical performance of the WTaCrV  RHEA remain 

insufficiently understood, hindering its widespread engineering application. Experimental studies 

have demonstrated the outstanding irradiation tolerance of W -based RHEAs, with negligible 

irradiation hardening and no observable dislocation loo ps even after 8 dpa  [6, 7] . However, the 

detailed defect evolution and deformation mechanisms remain largely unclarified. Additionally, it 

is widely accepted that the fundamental characteristics of RHEAs are heavily dictated by their 

complex internal chemical environments, specific ally the random solid -solution (RSS) and local 

chemical order (LCO) effects. The RSS effect originates from the inherent chemical disorder of 

multi -principal elements randomly occupying lattice sites, which induces significant lattice 

distortion and locali zed strain fields at the atomic scale  [9, 10] . The LCO effect, by contrast, arises 

from enthalpic interactions among constituent elements, leading to preferential elemental pairing 

> [11 -13]

. As pointed out by preliminary studies  [2, 12, 14, 15] , the RSS and LCO effects critically influence 3

defect formation, migration, and plastic flow during irradiation and loading. However, a major 

scientific bottleneck in current research is that both RSS and LCO effects manifest at the nanometer 

or even sub -nanometer scales  [11, 13] . This spatial restriction makes it challenging to experimentally 

measure, isolate, and independently study their individual impacts on material behaviors. This 

knowledge gap directly impedes the rational design and perform ance optimization of W -based 

RHEA  for nuclear applications. 

To overcome the limitations of experimental characterization, atomistic si mulations such as 

molecular dynamics (MD)  are  invaluable for tracking primary collision cascades, nanoscale 

plasticity, and the associated RSS and LCO effects. Nevertheless, computational exploration of the 

quaternary W -Ta -Cr -V system is currently severely hindered by the lack of suitable modeling 

st rategies and robust interatomic potentials capable of explicitly decoupling these two effects. In 

conventional full -element MD models, th e RSS and LCO effects inherently coexist and are 

convoluted within a single configuration, making it difficult to attribute observed behaviors to 

either factor alone. Although some studies attempt to isolate RSS and LCO effects by comparing 

the properties  of HEAs with those of pure constituent metals  [2, 16] , such comparisons are challenged 

by the inherent differences in the  basic  properties and resulting behaviors of alloys and metals. To 

address this challenge, the average -atom (AA) approach has been proposed, in which an ‘artificial’ 

single -element material with compositionally averaged properties replaces the multi -principal al loy 

> [17]

. This approach has recently been applied to study radiation damage and indentation responses 

of FeNiCrCo -based HEAs  [2, 18]  and to investigate the deformation mechanisms of HfNbTaZr -based 

RHEAs  [4, 14] . By comparing the distinct responses of AA, RSS, and LCO configurations, the 

independent roles of chemical randomness and short -range ordering can be isolated. However, the 

reliability of the AA model largely depends on the accuracy of the full -element in teratomic 

potentials, as it is constructed through a weighted combination of the constituent metal potentials. 

Therefore, developing a high -precision interatomic potential that accurately captures the energetic, 

structural, mechanical, and defect propertie s of the W -Ta -Cr -V quaternary system is essential to 

enable such a modeling strategy. 

To fill  these  research gaps,  the  atomistic modeling strategy is applied to the WTaCrV RHEA 4

to systematically isolate and quantify the individual and coupled effects of RSS and LCO by 

comparing AA, RSS, and LCO configurations. Interatomic potentials for the WTaCrV RHEA are 

developed based on density functional theory (DFT) reference data. By syst ematically simulating 

primary collision cascades and subsequent uniaxial tension, we elucidate how nanoscale chemical 

environments influence defect evolution and mechanical degradation. The remainder of this paper 

is organized as follows: Section 2 outline s the computational methods, including the potential 

development and simulation settings; Section 3 presents and discusses the main findings of this 

work, including the  basic  properties and local chemical ordering of WTaCrV, radiation damage 

evolution, and mechanical degradation behaviors. 

2.  Computational details 

2.1 Interatomic potential development 

As pointed out in previous studies,  RSS and LCO effects  can  cause  nanostructural distortion 

and  strain energy accumulation  in the RHEA , which  further modulate the energy barrier s of 

materials behaviors such as diffusion, plastic  flow  or defects  nucleation  [4, 10, 12, 19] . However,  both 

RSS and LC O take effect within  nanometer  scale  [11, 13] , thereby challenging to be experimentally 

measured . To  overcome this barrier , a  novel  atomistic  modelling  strategy  is proposed , as 

schematically displayed in Fig. 1a.  The  RSS effect  is a  result from the complex mutual interactions 

among various constituent metals in the RHEA.  Therefore, the RSS effects can be isolated if  we 

design a n elemental  material  containing only one ‘ artificial ’ element  (i.e., the  A-atom or  AA  [15, 17, 

> 18]

), whose  properties are identical t o the macroscale averaged values of  the  RHEA.  Besides , the 

LCO effect can be  incorporated  using  Monte  Carlo  (MC) optimization  [8] , which rearrange 

distribution  of elements  according to their mutual affinity . By  comparing materials  responses  of 

AA,  RSS and LCO configurations, the  roles of  atomic scale  chemical  environments  on radiation 

damage and mechanical degradation of WTaCrV RHEA can be  revealed .5

Fig . 1  (a)  Model ling  strategy to separate RSS and LCO effects.  (b)  Flowchart of interatomic 

potential development. 

The model ling  strategy in Fig. 1a  requires  suitable interatomic potentials , which  must be first 

developed.  In this study, the  workflow of potential development is detailed in Fig. 1b.  We select 

the Embedded Atom Method (EAM)  that  has been  validated  to balance accuracy and computational 

efficiency in simulating metallic  materials . The  general  functional form  of EAM can be  expressed 

as  [20] 

, (1) 

where  φ(r),  F(ρ) and  ρ(r) are  the pair interaction,  the  embedded function and  the  electron density .

In this study,  the  widely utilized Zhou and Wadley functional form of EAM  [21]  is adopted, given 

as: 

, (2) 6

, (3) 

, . (4) 

Eqs. 2~4  give  23 adjustable parameters for each element.  Considering  a total of  four metal 

elements ( W, Ta, Cr  and  V) and their  mutual  interactions , 119 internal parameters  need  to be 

determined  for a  reliable  alloy potential  that  accurately predicts  reference  properties of  pure  metals, 

intermetallic compounds and alloys.  Here, we  use  density functional theory  (DFT)  to calculate 

these  reference data, including energetic, structural, mechanical and defect properties  (the 

comparison of MD and DFT data are detailed in section S 1 of the supplementary material) . The 

DFT  calculations are performed using  the Quantum E spresso  package  [22] . The pseudopotentials 

are constructed with the ultrasoft/PAW method and the exchange correlation is described by the 

PBE -GG A form  [23, 24] . The Brillouin Zone is sampled using Monkhorst -Pack grids; the  k spacing 

is set  to  < 0.03 Å -1.

Subsequently,  all  internal  parameters  are  adjusted using a  homemade  package performing 

distributed breeder genetic algorithm (DBGA)  [25, 26] , which  searches the entire variable space and 

efficiently  approaches  to the  global optimal . Eighty percent of DFT data are included in this  training 

process.  Then, 5% of the parameter sets with lowest loss function values are chosen;  a local 

SIMPLEX optimization is conducted to  further  minimize the prediction error s towards the 

remaining  20%  of  DFT data.  Finally, the optimal parameters for  the full element  system  are 

obtained, hereafter referred  to  as the Alloy potential  (all parameters are listed in section  S1 of the 

supplementary material) .7

The A -atom (AA) potential  can be directly  constructed based on the  developed  W, Ta, Cr and 

V potentials  as  [17] :

, (5) 

with  , , . (6) 

In Eqs. 5~6 , cX denote s nominal  concentration  of an element  X in the RHEA  (namely, 25 % in 

equimolar WTaCrV) . This  combination strategy  is proven reliable in previous studies on 

FeCoNiCr -based FCC structured  alloys  [2, 18] .

To improve the accuracy of Alloy and AA potentials  in  simulating  collision cascades,  the pair 

interactions within  0.5  Å are  modified  by the  Ziegler -Biersack -Littmark (ZBL) potential  [27] :

, (7)

where  e is the charge of an electron,  ε0 is the  permittivity  in vacuum,  Z is the atomic number,  Φ is 

the screening function.  A connection function  [5, 25, 28]  is used within the range of 0.5~1.0 Å to 

ensure smooth transition  between  EAM and ZBL. 

2.2  Simulation  settings 

To conduct  MD  simulations  on  primary irradiation damage  in the WTaCrV RHEA , BCC -

structured single crystalline  AA and RSS configurations are first created with dimensions of 

60 a×60 a×60 a where  a is the equilibrium lattice constant  (the choice of  model size is detailed in 

section  S2.1  of the supplementary material) . Periodic boundary conditions are applied in all 

directions.  The two types of configurations  (namely, AA and  RSS configurations)  are thermally 

equilibrated at 300 K  for 500  ps,  using an NPT ensemble  to release internal stress . Thereafter,  a

hybrid MC/MD optimization is performed on  the  RSS configurations , during which  atomic species 8

are  switched to reduce  the potential  energy  of the system  [8] . The swap trial s a re accepted according 

to Metropolis criterion ; a simulated annealing strategy  [4]  is utilized to gradually reduce temperature 

from  1200  K to 300 K.  The MC optimized models are equilibrated for  another  500 ps in NPT 

ensemble;  the final models are denoted as LCO configurations. 

During cascade simulations, boundary layers with a thickness of 10.0 Å is  endowed  the  NVT 

ensemble  along with  the  Nosé -Hoover thermostat  to  absorb  the collision energy and cool the system 

back  to 300 K  [19, 29] , while the central  simulation domain  are  under  the  NVE ensemble.  A tungsten 

atom is randomly selected as the primary knock -on atom (PKA)  and  is  then  moved to the center of 

simulation domain by shifting  all atoms across periodic boundaries . The PKA  is  then given a n

initial  kinetic energy  ranging from 5 keV ~ 40 keV  with the velocity along  the  <135> direction  to 

avoid  channel effects  [29, 30] . The system is subsequently relaxed for 200~500 ps , as listed in Table 

1.  For each confi guration under a specific PKA energy, 15 independent simulations are conducted 

to  represent the  statistical  fluctuation . An adaptive  timestep ( from  10 -4 fs  to 1.0 fs)  is utilized ; the 

timestep  is  adjusted so that each atom did not  move more than 0.0 5 Å per step. 

Table 1  The PKA energies considered in this study and the associated relaxation time after initial 

collision .       

> PKA energy Relaxation time (ps)
> 5 keV 200 ps
> 10 keV 300 ps
> 20 keV 400 ps
> 30 keV 400 ps
> 40 k eV 500 ps

To investigate the  RSS and LCO effects on the  irradiation  induced  mechanical degradation,  the 

configurations after PKA collisions are  replicated  two times along the  z dir ection.  The  x and  y

directions are switched to shrink -wrapped  boundary conditions to create a nanopillar  with free 

surfaces . The nanopillars are then  uniaxially stretched via displacement loading  at 300 K . The stress 

evolution  is  recorded  to  analyze mechanical responses .

In this study, simulations are performed using the LAMMPS  simulation package  [31] ; MD 

results are visualized using  the OVITO software  [32] . Crystalline structures are  analyzed  using the 9

Polyhedral template matching  (PTM) algorithm  [33] ; point defects are identified using the Wigner -

Seitz analysis tool  [2]  and dislocations are analyzed via DXA  algorithm  [34] . In all simulations  except 

collision cascades , the timestep is  fixed  as 1.0 fs ; the  loading strain rate is set as 10 8/s  which is 

typical in MD studies  [35]  (an analysis on strain rate sensitivity is given in section  S2.2  of the 

supplementary material) .

3.  Results 

3.1  Basic properties and local chemical order  (LCO) 

In this section,  some basic properties of the WTaCrV  RHEA are computed using the developed 

interatomic potential s and compared with DFT data , in order  to  demonstrate  their  reliability .

Besides, the nanoscale chemical order ing  is  revealed by  hybrid MC/MD  simulations , which is  the 

prerequisites  for investigating LCO effect.  Furthermore, t he  RSS - and  LCO -influence d formation 

energies of  point defect s are  also  analyzed  for subsequent radiation damage  study .

Fig.  2a displays  the cohesive energy, lattice parameter and elastic constants  calculated using 

DFT, Alloy and AA potentials.  Results suggest that  both developed potentials  reasonably  predict 

these properties of  WTaCrV RHEA , consistent with DFT data . Besides,  these properties  of 

WTaCrV  are found to obey the rule of mixing  (ROM) , i.e., the  alloy properties can be described 

using  those of constituent metals :

QRHEA  = ∑ ciQi     

> i=N
> i=1

, (8)

where  Q denotes a specific property,  c is the  nominal concentration  and  i = 1~4 represents W, Ta, 

Cr and V.  The consistence  with  ROM is analogous to  a broad range of  other HEAs  with either BCC 

or FCC structures  [4, 36, 37] , indicating  it may be  a universal phenomenon  that  validate s the concept 

of  the AA method  (Eq. 6) . Nonetheless, consistence  of static properties  with ROM  does not 

necessarily represent  that  dynamic  material  behaviors  are also manifested as averages of their 

constituents.  The  RSS and LCO effects  are non -negligible , as will be further discussed in the 

following sections. 10 

In addition  to  the basic properties in  Fig. 2a , stacking fault energy is another  important 

property as it  is closely related to  nanoscale  plastic deformation  mechanisms  (i.e., dislocation slip, 

deformation twinning , etc.)  [4, 38, 39] . Fig. 2b  show s the generalized stacking fault energy (GSFE) 

curves  for two typical  slip systems of BCC  crystal  (namely,  <110>(110) and <111>( 112 )). GSFE 

predicted using  AA and Alloy potentials  exhibits  consistent  values , which is also  in agreement with 

DFT calculated GSFE curves.  The correctly pred icted elastic constants and GSFE curves ( Figs. 2a 

and 2b ) suggest  the applicability of our potential in  simulating mechanical  behaviors  of WTaCrV 

RHEA  under various loading conditions  [4, 12, 39] . Further  performance  tests  of the developed 

potentials  (e.g., mechanical properties of pure metals and equation of states for binary and ternary 

compounds)  are  detailed  in section S 1 of the supplementary material. 

More detailed performance evaluations (e.g., the mechanical properties of pure metals and the 

equations of state for binary and ternary compounds) of the developed potentials are presented in 

Section S1 of the Supplementary Material. 

Fig.  2 (a)  Cohesive energy  Ecoh , lattice constant  a, elastic constants  C11 , C12,  C44  of the WTaVCr 

RHEA, calculated  via  DFT,  Alloy  potential , AA  potential  and rule of mixing.  (b)  Comparison of 

GSFE curves calculated using different methods.  Shaded  bands  represent  the variation range . (c) 

Atomic deposition  process  predicted using  the  developed  potential .11 

In addition to the  static properties,  it is also necessary to  test the potentials’ ability to retain 

structural stability in  dynamic simulations under finite temperatures.  Previous studies have 

indicated that,  with  highly flexible function forms and  massive tunable parameters,  complex  force 

fields  (e.g., machine learning force fields and some bond -order force fields)  may  fail  by structural 

collapse  in  dynamic simulations  although  they  reproduce static properties with DFT accuracy  [4, 40] .

Thus, we conduct atomic deposition simulation under room temperature as shown in Fig. 2c.  Both 

Alloy and AA potentials are able to describe the process  where  vaporized  atoms deposit on substrate 

and  spontaneously  grow into the ground state BCC structure.  This indicates  that  the developed 

potential s are  applicable in  simulating  RHEA in extreme conditions  far from  the  equilibrium state, 

e.g., radiation cascade and shock compression.  Results in Fig.  2 validate the  accuracy and  wide 

applicability of  the EAM f unctional form , not to mention  its inherent  high  computational efficien cy 

> [41]

.

Subsequently, we study the  nanoscale chemical ordering  using the developed Alloy potential 

through hybrid MC/MD optimization.  The  optimized RHEA configuration is displayed in Fig. 3a, 

in which apparent LCO  can be observed.  The ordering patterns can be  captured  and quantified 

using the  Warren -Cowley (WC) order parameters , given as  [12] 

αij  

> n

= (pij  

> n

– Cj) / (δij  – Cj), (9)

where  n represents  the  n-th nearest -neighbor shell  surrounding  a central atom  i, pij  is  the average 

probability of finding a  j atom around the  i atom within the  n-th  shell,  Cj is  the  macroscale 

concentration and  δij  is the Kronecker delta function.  For pairs of different elements ( i  j), negative 

value s denote  clustering . The  calculated  WC  parameters  α1ij  are shown in Fig . 3b . The negative 

values for  W-V and  Ta -Cr  pairs  suggest  strong  attraction , which may be attributed to the large 

negative mixing enthalpies among these two pairs of elements  as reported in previous  studies  [8, 42] .

However,  th is  LCO  pattern  within single crystalline RHEA  (Fig. 3a)  seems  inconsistent with  some 

experiment al observations , which  report  phase separation into  W-Ta -enriched  and Cr -V-enriched 

regions  [6, 7] . A recent machine learning study has pointed out that  such discrepancy  may  result from 

the significant difference in lattice constants between WTa and CrV  binary  compounds  [8] .12 

Therefore, h uge misfit strain  will  generate  if  the W -Ta -enriched and Cr -V-enriched regions share a 

coherent interface.  We  thereby  construct a model as shown in Fig. 3c, where  a spherical BCC 

precipitate ( a=2.7Å)  is inserted into  RHEA  BCC lattice ( a=3.15Å) , creating  a semi -coherent 

interface  to prevent accumulation of strain energy.  As revealed in Fig. 3c, a fter MC optimization, 

the W -Ta and Cr -V clustering is successfully reproduced  in  agreement  with experiments.  Results 

in Fig. 3 demonstrate the developed potential  can  correctly  predict interaction among alloy 

elements  and thus the LCO phenomenon. I t can be utilized to investigate the RSS and LCO effects 

on radiation damage and mechanical behavior. 

Fig . 3 (a) The  MC -optimized single crystalline RHEA with internal LCO . (b) The  corresponding 

WC  parameters of different element pairs.  (c) Atomic configuration of  W38 Ta 36 Cr 15 V11  with a 

BCC precipitate  (R = 20 Å)  after MC  optimization . The alloy composition is selected based on  a

previous  experiment  [7] . A semi -coherent  interface is created by inserting  a spherical p recipitate 

with a smaller lattice constant . The related compositional profile is also shown. 

Finally,  the RSS and LCO effects on the formation energy of point defects (i.e., vacancies and 13 

interstitials)  are analyzed.  As shown in Fig s. 4a~4b, both vacancy and interstitial formation energies 

of the  RSS  RHEA  exhibit broad distributions, which  results from the complex internal interactions 

among elements  induced by the high -entropy effect  [43] . The average formation energies  of 

vacancies and interstitials are  Evf = 3.042 eV/atom and  Eif = 5.028 eV/atom, res pectively.  The  Eif

is calcula ted  via energy minimization of randomly introduced single interstitials . The  defect 

formation energies  are close to  previously reported  DFT  values  [44] . Besides, the  average  Evf and 

Eif of RSS models are consistent with AA predictions . However, the  consistent average defect 

formation energies  do not necessarily represent identica l resistance against radiation damage ; the 

effect  of interactions among different elements  will be detailed in the following sections . Moreover ,

Figs. 4c and 4d  show that t he average  Evf and  Eif of LCO configurations increase to 3.501 eV/atom 

and 8.538 eV/atom, respectively.  The increased defect formation energies indicate that LCO may 

suppress  nucleation  of point defects during cascades . Notably, the LCO -induced increase in  Eif is 

larger  than that in  Evf, which can be  understood  by  decomposing the defect formation energy within 

the EAM framework:  ΔEf = ΔEpair  + ΔEembed , where the pair -interaction term  (corresponding to 

the  pairwise interaction  φAB ) dominat es  [20] . For  creating  a vacancy, the energy cost  arises  primarily 

from  removing an atom at the equilibrium nearest -neighbor distance ( dvac  

> equi

≈ 2.7 Å) , where all ten 

pair potentials nearly coincide (Fig. 4e, inset) . For an interstitial, the inserted atom forces its 

neighbors into the short -range repulsive part of  φAB  (e.g.,  the octahedral site  lies  only  dint  

> oct

≈1.56 Å 

from the nearest neighbors) . In this steeply repulsive regime , the differences among all 10  φAB 

functions are much more significant at  dint 

> oct

, indicating  the interstitial formation more sensitive to 

the local chemical environment than that of the vacancy. 14 

Fig.  4 (a)~(d)  Kernel density estimation  (KDE)  [45]  on  point defect formation energies of  AA, 

RSS and LCO configurations  of  the  WTaCrV  RHEA . Each curve  is calculated from 500 

independent samples.  Dashed lines represent the mean value s of the probability  distribution . (e) 

Pair -potential envelope for WTaCrV.  The b lack curve represents the average  of  all 10  pairwise 

functions  φAB , and  the  shaded area  indicates the range . The inset  shows a  magnified  area near the 

equilibrium position (~ 2.7 Å) .

3.2 Radiation  damage 

In this section,  the RSS and LCO effects on  primary  damage of WTaCrV RHEA are 

systematically  studied . The time evolution of Frenkel pairs (FPs)  in  AA, RSS and LCO 15 

configurations  under  collision  cascades  with varying PKA energy  is shown in Fig.  5.  For all 

collision cases,  the number of  FPs promptly rises  at first and  gradually reduces after the thermal 

spike.  Among all PKA energies,  the number of FPs  in the three configurations  consistently  follows 

the sequence : NRSS  > NLCO  > NAA . It can  thus  be inferred that  the RSS effect weakens the  damage 

resistance, while LCO effect enhance  the resistance.  In fact, the reduced damage resistance  in RSS 

RHEA can be explained by  the defect formation energy  in Fig . 4 . Unlike the AA models, t he 

complex interactions  among  metal  elem ents  in  the  RSS configurations  result in rugged energy 

landscape for  formation , migration, agglomeration and annihilation of point defects  [9, 11, 12, 43] , as 

evidenced by  the broad  energy distribution in Fig s. 4 a and 4b . Consequently , there exist  nanoscale 

‘weak ’ regions  with  lower defect formation energies  in  RSS  alloy , serv ing  as  preferable  nucleation 

site s for vacancies and interstitials . This  explains  the higher number of FPs  in RSS models 

compared with AA models under  an  identical PKA level.  On the other hand, the existence of LCO 

tend to enhance lattice cohesion  [46, 47]  and stabilize the BCC crystalline structure  (the  average 

cohesive energy  is  -6.9 2 eV/atom  for LCO RHEA  compared to  -6.70 eV/atom in RSS RHEA) .

Therefore, both the resistance against FP generation and the ability  for recombination  of FPs are 

improved , leading to  lower  number of defects during primary damage stage  compared with the 

RSS models .

Fig.  5 The evolutions of average numbers of  Frenkel pair s in  AA, RSS and LCO  configurations 

as function s of time for PKA energies of (a)  5 keV, (b)  10  keV, (c)  20  keV, (d)  30  keV , and (h)  40 16 

keV . The solid lines represent the average values over 15 independent samples,  and  the  shaded 

band  indicates  the  range .

The  peak number and the surviving number  of FPs  as functions of PKA energy for AA, RSS 

and LCO configurations are shown in Fig s. 6 a and 6b . For three configurations,  the number s of 

FPs increase with increasing PKA energy.  The  RSS models exhibit highest damage level , followed 

by the LCO  models.  The  AA models show lowest numbers of FPs at thermal spike and after 

relaxation.  In addition, the difference among  FP number s becomes more significant as PKA energy 

increases.  Under 40 keV PKA energy,  the peak number of FPs in RSS models is  nearly twice higher 

than that in the AA models, while  the surviving FP number in RSS models is  almost ten times as 

many as that in the AA models.  Besides,  based on data in Figs. 6a and 6b,  the recombination rate  η

of FPs  can be calculated . Fig. 6c  shows  that  for all RHEA configurations,  η ranges from  89 % to 

97 % , indicating good radiation tolerance of  the  WTaCrV RHEA.  Under all studied PKA energy, 

RSS configurations exhibit lowest recombination rate.  Meanwhile,  the recombination rate s of FPs 

are similar for AA and LCO models, regardless of PKA energy.  Results in Fig. 6 also  illustrate  the 

opposite effects of RSS and LCO , i.e.,  RSS weakens the damage resistance and radiation tolerance 

while  LCO enhances these properties. 

Fig.  6 (a)  The  number of  FPs at the thermal spike and (b) the number of surviving FPs as 

functions of PKA energy.  The recombination rate  is calculated using  η = ( Npeak  – Nfinal ) /  Npeak  and 

displayed in (c). 

Subsequently, we investigated  how  the surviving defects  after  PKA collision distributed  in 

RHEA  with  different local  chemical environments.  The s ize distribution s of  interstitial  clusters  are 17 

shown in Fig. 7.  Notably, the  distributions of vacancy clusters and interstitial clusters are similar 

and therefore only the latter is presented.  Under 5 keV PKA,  interstitial clusters  in AA, RSS and 

LCO models  exhibit  similar  numbers  and  contain only two  point  defects.  As PKA energy increasing, 

both  the number  and size  of clusters  promptly  increase  in RSS model s.  In contrast,  the total 

number s of interstitial clusters in the AA and LCO models  mildly increase . Even subjected to 40 

keV PKA collision , the largest cluster size remains less than 10  interstitials  in these two models. 

Furthermore, it is worth noting that  no dislocation loop is observed  in all cases , suggesting  excellent 

resistance of WTaCrV against  defect accumulation  and  mechanical degradation  (which  will be 

discussed  in  the later sections ).

Fig.  7 Distributions of a verage number s of interstitials clusters for  AA , RSS  and  LCO 

configurations , after (a)  5 and ( b) 10 keV, ( c) 20 keV , (d)  30 keV  and (e) 40 keV  PKA  cascade .

The time evolution of temperature in NVE regions are shown in Fig. 8.  Clearly,  the temperature 

decreases  most quickly in  the  AA configuration s unde r PKA collision s. Besides, as PKA energy 

increases,  the difference in  cooling  rate s between RSS and LCO models  becomes more apparent. 

It takes longest time for RSS models to  recover  the steady state , which is consistent with the defect 

evolution  behavior  in Fig.  5.  Results in Fig.  8 suggest that  RSS effect weakens  the ability to 

dissipat e the collision energy , while LCO effect  slightly enhances the energy dissipation capability .18 

Additionally,  the internal temperature pattern s at thermal spike and  during  relaxation  are detailed 

in Fig. 9 . It is revealed that  the cascade -induced  thermal  spike  is  restricted within a  relatively 

smaller region  in  the  RSS model, while  the incident energy spreads more widely in AA and LCO 

models.  Besides,  the overall temperature  at 65 ps  is relatively lower in  the  AA model compared  to 

the RSS and LCO models , evidencing its  highest  cooling rate.  Moreover,  some studies on  high -

entropy  alloys or ceramics  have  reported that the high configurational entropy in multi -principal 

materials  can  cause  reduc ed  electron mean  free path and a decrease in electrical and thermal 

conductivity  [25, 28, 30] . This  further  leads to  slower  energy dissipation  after collision . Such a  long er 

lifetime of thermal spikes  can  favor  recombination  of  local  FPs  at  the core of the cascade , thus 

suppressing  the formation  of irradiation defect clusters  [2, 29, 48] . However,  larger numbers  and sizes 

of  clusters  in RSS models  (Fig. 7 ) indicate that, for  the  WTaCrV RHEA , a slower  cooling rate 

resulting from  the  RSS effect  does not necessarily  facilitate  damage  recovery . Also, it is usually 

attributed to the ‘high -entropy’ effect that  causes  the  slower energy dissipation  [49] , but  in real 

RHEAs  consisting of  multi -principal component s, the ‘high -entropy’  effect  is always  the  combined 

consequence of RSS and LCO effects . Fig.  8 demonstrate s that  the RSS effect (i.e., chemical 

disorder)  is the main cause  of  such slow dissipation. 

Fig.  8 The average time evolution of temperature at centered (i.e., NVE)  region  in AA, RSS and 19 

LCO configurations after  (a) 5  keV , (b) 10 keV, (c) 20 keV, (d) 30 keV and (e) 40 keV  cascade s.

Fig. 9  Temperature profile  (a) at thermal spike and  (b) after 65 ps relaxation  within  AA, RSS and 

LCO configurations  subjected to  20 PKA collision. 

Fig . 10  displays the composition of vacancies and interstitial s in RSS and LCO models.  As 

shown in Figs. 10a and 10b,  the four metals (W, Ta, Cr and V)  take up  similar atomic frac tion s of 

all vacancies , which are mainly within the range of 20%~30%  close to their  nominal concentration 

25  % in  the RHEA . The relative fractions show no apparent variation with increasing PKA energy. 

Such compositions of vacancies can be ascribed to the vacancy formation energies of  the four 

metals , which  are  within a  relatively  narrower  range (i.e., 2.0~4.0  eV/atom , Table 2 ) compared with 

those of interstitials  (3.0~10.0 eV/atom, Table 2) . On the other hand,  interstitials are mainly 

comprised of Cr atoms.  For RSS configurations, the content of interstitial Cr drops from  66 % to 

29 %  as the PKA energy increases from 5 keV to 40 keV.  The higher content of Cr in interstitials 

under lower PKA energies  seems contradict with interstitial formation energy listed in Table 2, 

showing  that  V rather than Cr  own s the lowest formation energy.  In fact, the enrichment of Cr 

interstitials results from  the RSS induced lattice distortion  [10] . Table 3 displays the average atomic 

strain  of the four constituent metals in the RSS configurations. Clearly, Cr is subjected to the highest 

strain level; the severely distorted local atomic arrangement  around Cr atoms thereby favor s their 20 

detachment from original lattice sites  under PKA collisions , leading to high concentration of Cr 

interstitials . As PKA energy increases,  the incident energy passed to the RHEA system is so high 

that all elements at the cascade core are able to overcome lattice cohesive forces and become 

interstitials, which explains  the similar atomic fractions at 40 keV.  In contrast to the RSS models, 

the atomic fraction of interstitial Cr  remains  high within  the entire  studied  PKA range.  This can be 

attributed to the LCO induced elemental redistribution, which further raises the  local distortion and 

thus strain level of Cr  as evidenced in Table 3. 

Fig.  10  Fraction  of  elements in  surviving vacancies and interstitials  vs. PKA energy  within RSS 

and LCO configurations. 

Table  2 Point defect formation energies of the four pure metallic materials W, Ta, Cr and V. 

Values in the parentheses  represent DFT results  for comparison .             

> Metallic material Point d efect formation energy (eV/atom)
> Vacancy Interstitial
> W3.9 0 ( 3. 71)9. 42(9. 79)
> Ta 3.0 1 ( 2.8 6) 5.94 (5.8 7) 21
> Cr 2.0 2 ( 2. 09) 4.5 6(5. 18)
> V2. 74 ( 2. 55)3.4 8 ( 3. 72)

Table  3 Average  strain  level  of metals in RSS and LCO configurations . The strain of a specific 

element is calculated using atomic volume difference in RHEA and in  pure  metallic phase ,

(√VRHEA  

> 3

-√VMetallic  

> 3

) / √VMetallic  

> 3

.           

> Metallic material Strain (%)
> RSS LCO
> W-1.459 -2. 231
> Ta -4.808 -4.469
> Cr 8.570 8.8 57
> V3.050 2.080

3.3  Mechanical  degradation 

In this section,  the  ultimate tensile  strength  and flow stress  of  irradiated  AA, RSS and LCO 

configurations  under  varying  PKA energ ies  are  studied , as shown in Fig. 11 . For  configurations 

unaffected by radiation cascades  (i.e.,  with  0 keV PKA energy) , the  strength  σmax  fol low s the 

sequence  σmax  

> AA

> σmax  

> LCO

> σmax 

> RSS

, suggesting that RSS effect weakens alloy strength while LCO effect 

enhances  the resistance against yielding . In fact, this trend of  σmax  is consistent with previous crystal 

plasticity theories  [15, 18] . It is  accepted  that the strengths of metals or alloys  represent the minimum 

stress required to activate the nucleation of plastic  deformation  carriers  (e.g., dislocations, 

deformation  twins, secondary phases, etc.)  in an initially defect -free crystal. This stress is closely 

related to internal bond characters that  can be qualitatively assessed by  the Pugh ratio ( B / G) and 

the  Cauchy pressure  (C12  – C44 ), where  B and  G are the bulk and shear modulus respectively  [50, 51] .

Lower  values of  Pugh ratio  and  Cauchy pressure  represent  higher covalent bonding characteristics 

and therefore higher strengths  [50, 52] . As listed in Table 4 , AA configuration exhibits lowest  Pugh 

ratio  and  Cauchy pressure  and  RSS configuration shows highest values  (see our previous works  [28,  

> 53]

for the  calculation of  B and  G). Table 4  indicate s tha t σmax  of  the  three configuration s should 

follow the  hierarchy  of AA >  LCO  > RSS , which  is consistent with  MD  results in Fig. 11a. 22 

Fig.  11  (a)  Ultimate tensile s trength ( i.e.,  maximum  value s of  tensile  stress -strain curves ) and ( b)

flow stress  (i.e.,  average stress within 0.15~0.2 strain  range) as functions of PKA energy for AA, 

RSS and LCO  RHEA configurations .

Table  4 The  average  ratios of bulk modulus  B to shear modulus  G and the Cauchy pressure  C12  –

C44  of AA, RSS and LCO configurations.  The results  of RSS and LCO configurations  represent 

the mean values of  15 samples .

Configuration  B / G C12  – C44  (GPa) 

AA  3.064  93.6248 

RSS  3. 368  111.521 

LCO  3.129  103.4 

On the other hand , the flow stress  of unirradiated RHEAs  follows  σflow  

> LCO

> σflow  

> RSS

> σflow  

> AA

, which 

indicates that both RSS and LCO effects elevate the  resistance against  the movements of nucleated 

plastic ity  carriers  (i.e., dislocation and twining, as will be  discussed  subsequently ). Compar ing  the 

RSS and AA configurations,  the interactions among different elements  in the former  will  cause 

severe lattice distortion and local strain field  [10] , leading to a roughened  potential  energy  surface 

with valleys and hills  [11, 12] . In this case,  the moving  plastic ity  carriers  in concentrated  alloy s always 

experiences a  local  energy  gradient,  which implies an extra dragging force  on the moving 

dislocations or twin boundaries  [11] . The above analysis  on the RSS -elevated flow stress  is 

supported by the complex shear and  volumetric strain fields  showing apparent fluctuations due to 

local composition variation, as  presented in Fig. 12.  In fact, even for a highly disordered 

concentrated solution, it is inherently inhomogeneous, because there will always be infinitesimal 

composition fluctuations much larger than in dilute solutions  [11, 13] . Meanwhile,  the  compari son 23 

between  the RSS and LCO configurations  reveal s that LCO effect exerts little impact on local shear 

strain  (Fig. 12) , but reduces the frequency of strain fluctuation due to the larger scale s of 

composition  domains  after elemental  pairing  (Fig. 3) . As mentioned in the previous section, LCO 

reduces chemical randomness,  stabilizes lattice structure and lowers potential energy  of the alloy 

system . As a results, the  motion  of plastic ity  carriers, which  involves  constant  breaking and forming 

local chemical bonds , would  require higher external stress to  over come  the  energetically favored 

order ing pattern  [13, 54] . This explains the highest flow stress level in the LCO configurations. 

Considering the radiation  effect on  mechanical properties, F ig . 11  shows  that  collision 

cascades  exert little  influence  on  the  strength and flow stress of RSS and LCO models, as  evidenced 

by  the lack of appreciable variation in these quantities with increasing PKA energy . In contrast, 

both  the  strength and flow stress of AA configurations  decrease  as PKA energy increases.  This 

suggests that,  despite  the  weaker  radiation  tolerance of  the RSS and LCO  configurations  (Figs. 5 

and 6) , the RSS and LCO effects  can  mitigate  irradiation -induced  mechanical degradation . The 

suppressed degradation  is ascribed to the lattice distortion  and internal  strain field s in the RSS and 

LCO models  (Fig. 12 ). As previously reported  [1, 55] , post -cascade  point defects  act  as preferential 

nucleation sites for plastic ity  carriers  (such as dislocations, twins or cavities ), owing to  locally 

elevated  potential energy and  disrupted  lattice structures . However,  because  neither  large  defect 

clusters  nor dislocation loops form after  primary damage  (Fig. 7), the  lattice distortion  induced by 

point defects  is  confined to a  few neighboring shells.  As  a result,  the extent of defect -induced lattice 

distortion is less significant  than  the inherent lattice distortion  caused by RSS and LCO effects (Fig. 

12b).  This explains  the less  pronounced  mechanical degradation after primary damage in RSS and 

LCO configurations  relative to the AA configuration .24 

Fig.  12  (a) The atomic scale strain filed  (shear and volumetric) within RSS and LCO RHEA 

configurations  compared with ideal  alloy  lattice . (b)  The corresponding strain profile along 

dashed lines in (a). 

We further  investigate the  detailed  stress -strain responses and nanostructural evolutions of 

representative AA, RSS and LCO RHEA configurations  subjected to  40 keV PKA collisions  (Fig. 

13 ). In all  three  configurations, plastic  deformation  proceeds  mainly through twinning, which is 

one of the most  common  deformation mechanisms  in  BCC metals and alloys and is consistent with 

previous studies on other BCC RHEAs  [4, 26, 56, 57] . During  the initial loading stage, all configurations 

deform elastically (Figs. 13a, 13 c and 13e) . Once  the stress reaches  its  maximum  (i.e.,  σmax ), 

nanotwins nucleate  and the  stored  strain energy is abruptly released  (Figs. 13b, 13d, 13f) . The 

twining planes  are oriented  at  ~45 o relative to  the axial direction.  In the AA model, t win  boundaries 

(TBs)  are mutually parallel ; in the RSS and LCO models , TBs  intersect each other  and restrict their 

mobility . This is another factor that may contribute to the higher flow stress in these two 

configurations . In addition, no dislocation s are  observed in the AA model during  the  plastic stage, 

whereas  1/2<111>  dislocations  appear  in the RSS and LCO models.  Further analysis on  the  atomic -

scale  structural evolution  reveals  that  dislocations nucleate after the  TBs  sweep  through  radiation 25 

defects ( Fig. 13h) . Unlike the  radiation defects in the AA models (Fig. 13 g), defect -TB  interactions 

in the RSS and LCO models  exert additional  drag forces on  the moving  TB s, leaving behind 

dislocation segments. These dislocations  are confined to a narrow region  between  adjacent TBs ;

their  motion  is  consequently  hindered.  The restricted dislocations  thus  lead to  accumulated  strain 

energy and  a higher flow stress. 

It is noteworthy that , according to  previous  studies , multiple plastic mechanisms can be 

activated in multicomponent BCC alloys  [4, 25, 58, 59] , depending on loading conditions, LCO extent, 

temperature, etc.  Here, only two plastic ity  carriers (i.e., dislocations and twins) are observed during 

uniaxial tensi on  of the WTaCrV RHEA nanopillars.  Based on the developed interatomic potentials, 

additional  plastic mechanisms  and  the competition  among  them  can be investigated in future  work .

Moreover, similar to the AA models used in this study, many traditional  macro - and meso -scale 

modelling methods  rely  on  homogenized , average d materials parameters  [60 -62]  and  therefore cannot 

fully  capture the  complex chemical inhomogeneities  of RHEAs,  limiting the accuracy of their 

predictions . The simulation strategy adopted here  explicitly  accounts for  chemical and structural 

complexity  and reveals the  distinct roles of  RSS and LCO effects on radiation damage and 

mechanical behavior.  The  findings  may help identify key physical mechanisms and  inform  future 

improvement s to  macroscale modelling techniques. 26 

Fig. 13  (a), (c),  (e)  The  stress -strain curves of  AA, RSS and LCO RHEA configurations after 40 

keV PKA collision.  (b), (d), (f) The  3D -distributions of nanotwins and dislocations.  Green lines 

denote 1/2<111> dislocations.  (g)  The atomic structure identified using PTM  (all BCC atoms are 

removed) , showing  interaction between deformation twins and radiation defects  in the AA model. 

(h)  The atomic structure showing  interaction between twins and radiation defects in the RSS 

model. 

Finally, we investigate whether radiation cascades influence the  inherent  chemical ordering 

patterns in the RHEA. As shown in Fig. 14a,  the defective RSS model after 40 keV PKA collision 

is subjected to an additional MC optimization. Results indicate that the  Cr  content  in both vacancies 

and interstitials continuously increases as MC  optimization  proceed s (Fig. 14b),  eventually 

approach ing  the Cr content in radiated LCO configuration (Fig. 10d) . This  suggests that  the 

presence  of  radiation defects  has  little impact on LCO.  A subsequent tensile test shows that  both 

the strength and flow stress of this ‘RSS+MC’ model  rise toward those of the LCO model  after 40 

keV PKA collision.  Results in Fig. 14 imply that the radiation -induced mechanical degradation can 27 

be mitigated  through  post -processing  treatments  such as thermal  annealing  that are known to 

modulate  the  LCO extent.  Moreover,  under actual service conditions,  WTaCrV RHEA is  typically 

exposed  to  elevated  temperature s [7, 44, 63, 64] . Such  an  environment may  promote  spontaneous 

elemental diffusion and LCO, thereby  facilitating  the  recovery  of  radiation damage  and mechanical 

properties . These  findings  further  highlight  the  promising  applicability  and  strong  potential  of 

WTaCrV  in  advanced nuclear energy applications. 

Fig. 14  (a) The elemental distribution within the cascade region of the RSS model after 40 keV 

collision , before and after MC optimization. (b) The atomic fraction variation in Cr and the rest 

three elements during MC optimization. (c)  The stress -strain curves of LCO , RSS , and MC 

optimized RSS  models under uniaxial tension. 

4.  Conclusions 

This study investigates the effects of  RSS  and  LCO  on the primary radiation damage and 

resulting  mechanical degradation of equimolar WTaCrV  RHEA  via  atomistic  simulations. The 

main conclusions are as follows: 28 

1.  An atomistic modeling strategy is proposed  to  isolate and  identif y the individual  roles of 

solid -solution randomness and short -range chemical ordering  on the radiation and mechanical 

responses of chemically complex alloys. 

2.  The Alloy and AA  interatomic  potentials for the WTaCrV RHEA  are  developed based on 

DFT reference data.  The developed potential s not only  accurately  reproduce  the  energetic, 

structural,  and mechanical  properties,  but also  retain  excellent structural and thermodynamic 

stability  in  dynamic simulations.  The accuracy and stability enable its  promising applicability  in 

simulating damage evolution and  plastic  deformation. 

3. The primary radiation damage  exhibits a strong dependence  on chemical environments  at 

nanoscale . T he number of  radiation defects  follows the sequence of  NRSS  > NLCO  > NAA . Interactions 

among different  alloy  elements in the RSS model cause  rugged energy landscape  that  accelerate s

defect production . In contrast,  the LCO effect enhances lattice cohesion  and  elevates defect 

formation energies , thereby effectively suppressing defect accumulation and clustering. 

4.  In spite of weaker damage resistance of the RSS and LCO configurations under radiation, 

the RSS and LCO effects are found to suppress mechanical degradation.  Uniaxial tensile 

simulations reveal that collision cascades  apparently  degrade the  mechanical properties  of the AA 

model, but exert a negligible impact on the strength and flow stress of both RSS and LCO models. 

This mitigation of mechanical degradation is derived from the pronounced inherent lattice 

distortion and localized strain fields in concentrated alloys, which outweigh defect -induced 

structural  disruptions.  Furthermore,  the  intersecting  TBs  and  the  defect -TB interactions in RSS and 

LCO models restrict  plastic flow  and promote dislocation storage , leading to  high er  flo w stress .

Supplementary materials 

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 

https://xxxxxx .

Data availability 29 

The  data and code that support the findings of this study are available on GitHub at :

https://github.com/wuyihan1995/Force_fields_for_refractory_metals .

Acknowledgements 

The authors  acknowledge the support of NSFC (Grant No:  12402212 ),  the  Qishan Scholar 

Project  (XRC -25092 ), and the Computing Center in Xi’an. 

References :

[1]  C. Xu, P. Li, X. Tian, W. Jiang, Q. Wang, H. Fan , Irradiation -induced grain boundary 

strengthening/embrittlement in bcc refractory high entropy alloy TiZrHfNbTa.  Journal of Nuclear Materials, 

2025.  617 : p. 156163. 

[2]  O.R. Deluigi, R.C. Pasianot, F.J. Valencia, A. Caro, D. Farkas, E.M. Bringa , Simulations of primary 

damage in a High Entropy Alloy: Probing enhanced radiation resistance.  Acta Materialia, 2021.  213 : p. 

116951. 

[3]  O.N. Senkov, G.B. Wilks, D.B. Miracle, C.P. Chuang, P.K. Liaw , Refractory high -entropy alloys. 

Intermetallics, 2010.  18 (9): p. 1758 -1765. 

[4]  Y. Wu, G. Yan, P. Yu, Y. Suo, W. Yu, S. Shen , Size -dependent tensile behavior of nanocrystalline HfNbTaTiZr 

high -entropy alloy: Roles of solid -solution and local chemical order.  International Journal of Plasticity, 2026. 

198 : p. 104626. 

[5]  Y. Chen, X. Liao, R. Qiu, L. Liu, W. Hu, H. Deng , Primary radiation damage in tungsten -based high -

entropy alloy: Interatomic potential and collision cascade simulations.  Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2023. 

585 : p. 154646. 

[6]  D. Sobieraj, J.S. Wróbel, T. Rygier, K.J. Kurzydłowski, O. El Atwani, A. Devaraj, E. Martinez Saez, D. 

Nguyen -Manh , Chemical short -range order in derivative Cr –Ta –Ti –V–W high entropy alloys from the first -

principles thermodynamic study.  Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 2020.  22 (41): p. 23929 -23951. 

[7]  O. El -Atwani, N. Li, M. Li, A. Devaraj, J.K.S. Baldwin, M.M. Schneider, D. Sobieraj, J.S. Wróbel, D. 

Nguyen -Manh, S.A. Maloy, E. Martinez , Outstanding radiation resistance of tungsten -based high -entropy 

alloys.  Science Advances, 2019.  5(3): p. eaav2002. 

[8]  J. Byggmästar, D. Sobieraj, J.S. Wróbel, D.K. Schreiber, O. El -Atwani, E. Martinez, D. Nguyen -Manh ,

Segregation, ordering, and precipitation in WTaV -based concentrated refractory alloys.  Acta Materialia, 2025. 

296 : p. 121276. 

[9]  S. Yin, J. Ding, M. Asta, R.O. Ritchie , Ab initio modeling of the energy landscape for screw dislocations in 

body -centered cubic high -entropy alloys.  npj Computational Materials, 2020.  6(1): p. 110. 

[10]  A. Fantin, G.O. Lepore, A.M. Manzoni, S. Kasatikov, T. Scherb, T. Huthwelker, F. d'Acapito, G. 

Schumacher , Short -range chemical order and local lattice distortion in a compositionally complex alloy. 

Acta Materialia, 2020.  193 : p. 329 -337. 

[11]  E. Ma, C. Liu , Chemical inhomogeneities in high -entropy alloys help mitigate the strength -ductility trade -

off.  Progress in Materials Science, 2024.  143 : p. 101252. 

[12]  Q. -J. Li, H. Sheng, E. Ma , Strengthening in multi -principal element alloys with local -chemical -order 30 

roughened dislocation pathways.  Nature Communications, 2019.  10 (1): p. 3563. 

[13]  Y. Wu, F. Zhang, X. Yuan, H. Huang, X. Wen, Y. Wang, M. Zhang, H. Wu, X. Liu, H. Wang, S. Jiang, 

Z. Lu , Short -range ordering and its effects on mechanical properties of high -entropy alloys.  Journal of 

Materials Science & Technology, 2021.  62 : p. 214 -220. 

[14]  P. Wang, Y. Bu, J. Liu, Q. Li, H. Wang, W. Yang , Atomic deformation mechanism and interface toughening 

in metastable high entropy alloy.  Materials Today, 2020.  37 : p. 64 -73. 

[15]  X. Zhang, J. Yan, Y. -H. Chen, R. Kevorkyants, T. Wen, X. Sun, A. Hu, J.C. Huang , Effects of lattice 

distortion and chemical short -range ordering on the incipient behavior of Ti -based multi -principal element 

alloys: MD simulations and DFT calculations.  International Journal of Plasticity, 2023.  166 : p. 103643. 

[16]  F. Tan, J. Li, B. Liu, P.K. Liaw, Q. Fang , Uncovering origin of grain boundary resistance to irradiation 

damage in NiCoCr multi -principal element alloys.  International Journal of Plasticity, 2024.  175 : p. 103925. 

[17]  C. Varvenne, A. Luque, W.G. Nöhring, W.A. Curtin , Average -atom interatomic potential for random alloys. 

Physical Review B, 2016.  93 (10): p. 104201. 

[18]  X. Zhang, J. Wang, K. Zheng, J. Yan, A. Hu, Y. Zhang, Y. Lin, Z. Ren , Revealing the critical roles of 

lattice distortion and short -range ordering in the nanoscale plasticity of CoCrNi multi -principal element alloy. 

International Journal of Plasticity, 2026.  200 : p. 104667. 

[19]  L. Koch, F. Granberg, T. Brink, D. Utt, K. Albe, F. Djurabekova, K. Nordlund , Local segregation versus 

irradiation effects in high -entropy alloys: Steady -state conditions in a driven system.  Journal of Applied 

Physics, 2017.  122 (10): p. 105106. 

[20]  H.W. Sheng, M.J. Kramer, A. Cadien, T. Fujita, M.W. Chen , Highly optimized embedded -atom -method 

potentials for fourteen fcc metals.  Physical Review B, 2011.  83 (13): p. 134118. 

[21]  X.W. Zhou, R.A. Johnson, H.N.G. Wadley , Misfit -energy -increasing dislocations in vapor -deposited 

CoFe/NiFe multilayers.  Physical Review B, 2004.  69 (14): p. 144113. 

[22]  P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G.L. Chiarotti, M. 

Cococcioni, I. Dabo, A. Dal Corso, S. de Gironcoli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. 

Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin -Samo s, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, 

A. Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A.P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. 

Umari, R.M. Wentzcovitch , QUANTUM ESPRESSO: a modular and open -source software project for 

quantum  simulations of materials.  Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, 2009.  21 (39): p. 395502. 

[23]  L. Zhang, G. Csányi, E. van der Giessen, F. Maresca , Atomistic fracture in bcc iron revealed by active 

learning of Gaussian approximation potential.  npj Computational Materials, 2023.  9(1): p. 217. 

[24]  L. Zhang, G. Csányi, E. van der Giessen, F. Maresca , Efficiency, accuracy, and transferability of machine 

learning potentials: Application to dislocations and cracks in iron.  Acta Materialia, 2024.  270 : p. 119788. 

[25]  Y. Wu, G. Yan, W. Yu, S. Shen , Investigating nanostructure -property relationship of WTaVCr high -entropy 

alloy via machine learning optimized reactive potential.  Journal of Materials Research and Technology, 2024. 

32 : p. 2624 -2637. 

[26]  Y. Wu, W. Yu, S. Shen , Developing a variable charge potential for Hf/Nb/Ta/Ti/Zr/O system via machine 

learning global optimization.  Materials & Design, 2023.  230 : p. 111999. 

[27]  J.F. Ziegler , THE STOPPING AND RANGE OF IONS IN SOLIDS , in  Ion Implantation Science and 

Technology (Second Edition) , J.F. Ziegler, Editor. 1988, Academic Press. p. 3 -61. 

[28]  Y. Wu, W. Yu, S. Shen , Developing an analytical bond -order potential for Hf/Nb/Ta/Zr/C system using 

machine learning global optimization.  Ceramics International, 2023.  49 (21): p. 34255 -34268. 

[29]  Y. Lin, T. Yang, L. Lang, C. Shan, H. Deng, W. Hu, F. Gao , Enhanced radiation tolerance of the Ni -Co -

Cr -Fe high -entropy alloy as revealed from primary damage.  Acta Materialia, 2020.  196 : p. 133 -143. 31 

[30]  C. Shan, L. Lang, T. Yang, Y. Lin, F. Gao, H. Deng, W. Hu , Molecular dynamics simulations of radiation 

damage generation and dislocation loop evolution in Ni and binary Ni -based alloys.  Computational Materials 

Science, 2020.  177 : p. 109555. 

[31]  S. Plimpton , Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short -Range Molecular Dynamics.  Journal of Computational 

Physics, 1995.  117 (1): p. 1 -19. 

[32]  S. Alexander , Visualization and analysis of atomistic simulation data with OVITO –the Open Visualization 

Tool.  Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering, 2010.  18 (1): p. 015012. 

[33]  P.M. Larsen, S. Schmidt, J. Schiøtz , Robust structural identification via polyhedral template matching. 

Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering, 2016.  24 (5): p. 055007. 

[34]  A. Stukowski, V.V. Bulatov, A. Arsenlis , Automated identification and indexing of dislocations in crystal 

interfaces.  Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering, 2012.  20 (8): p. 085007. 

[35]  S.C. Chowdhury, B.Z. Haque, J.W. Gillespie , Molecular dynamics simulations of the structure and 

mechanical properties of silica glass using ReaxFF.  Journal of Materials Science, 2016.  51 (22): p. 10139 -

10159. 

[36]  O.N. Senkov, J.M. Scott, S.V. Senkova, D.B. Miracle, C.F. Woodward , Microstructure and room 

temperature properties of a high -entropy TaNbHfZrTi alloy.  Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 2011.  509 (20): 

p. 6043 -6048. 

[37]  C. Niu, A.J. Zaddach, C.C. Koch, D.L. Irving , First principles exploration of near -equiatomic NiFeCrCo 

high entropy alloys.  Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 2016.  672 : p. 510 -520. 

[38]  J. Veerababu, A. Nagesha , Competition between full slip and twinning in BCC -Fe: Effect of preloaded stress 

and temperature.  Journal of Applied Physics, 2023.  134 (5): p. 055102. 

[39]  A. Ojha, H. Sehitoglu, L. Patriarca, H.J. Maier , Twin nucleation in Fe -based bcc alloys —modeling and 

experiments.  Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering, 2014.  22 (7): p. 075010. 

[40]  X.W. Zhou, D.K. Ward, M.E. Foster , An analytical bond -order potential for the aluminum copper binary 

system.  Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 2016.  680 : p. 752 -767. 

[41]  M.H. Müser, S.V. Sukhomlinov, L. Pastewka , Interatomic potentials: achievements and challenges. 

Advances in Physics: X, 2023.  8(1): p. 2093129. 

[42]  S. Lyu, W. Li, Y. Xia, Y. Chen, A.H.W. Ngan , Effects of chemical randomness on strength contributors and 

dislocation behaviors in a bcc multiprincipal element alloy.  Physical Review Materials, 2023.  7(7): p. 073602. 

[43]  S. Zhao, Y. Zhang, W.J. Weber , Engineering defect energy landscape of CoCrFeNi high -entropy alloys by 

the introduction of additional dopants.  Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2022.  561 : p. 153573. 

[44]  S. Zhao , Defect properties in a VTaCrW equiatomic high entropy alloy (HEA) with the body centered cubic 

(bcc) structure.  Journal of Materials Science & Technology, 2020.  44 : p. 133 -139. 

[45]  J.A. Gomberg, A.J. Medford, S.R. Kalidindi , Extracting knowledge from molecular mechanics simulations 

of grain boundaries using machine learning.  Acta Materialia, 2017.  133 : p. 100 -108. 

[46]  Y. Wu, Z. Bai, G. Yan, W. Yu, S. Shen , Size -dependent mechanical responses of twinned Nanocrystalline 

HfNbZrTi refractory high -entropy alloy.  International Journal of Refractory Metals and Hard Materials, 2024. 

125 : p. 106885. 

[47]  J. Li, Y. Wu, Z. Bai, W. Yu, S. Shen , Nanostructure -property relation of  Σ5  grain boundary in HfNbZrTi 

high -entropy alloy under shear.  Journal of Materials Science, 2023.  58 (15): p. 6757 -6774. 

[48]  H. Li, L. Zhao, y. Yang, H. Zong, X. Ding , Improving radiation -tolerance of bcc multi -principal element 

alloys by tailoring compositional heterogeneities.  Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2021.  555 : p. 153140. 

[49]  F. Wang, X. Yan, T. Wang, Y. Wu, L. Shao, M. Nastasi, Y. Lu, B. Cui , Irradiation damage in 

(Zr0.25Ta0.25Nb0.25Ti0.25)C high -entropy carbide ceramics.  Acta Materialia, 2020.  195 : p. 739 -749. 32 

[50]  F. Tian, L. Delczeg, N. Chen, L.K. Varga, J. Shen, L. Vitos , Structural stability of 

NiCoFeCrAl${}_{x}$ high -entropy alloy from ab initio theory.  Physical Review B, 2013.  88 (8): p. 085128. 

[51]  X. Li, F. Tian, S. Schönecker, J. Zhao, L. Vitos , Ab initio -predicted micro -mechanical performance of 

refractory high -entropy alloys.  Scientific Reports, 2015.  5(1): p. 12334. 

[52]  L. Qi , Effects of electronic structures on mechanical properties of transition metals and alloys.  Computational 

Materials Science, 2019.  163 : p. 11 -16. 

[53]  G. Yan, W. Wu, Y. Wang, M. Lan, J. Zhang, X. Liang, Y. Zhang, W. Yu, Y. Wu, S. Shen , Incipient 

plasticity in SrTiO3 influenced by Nb -doping and displacement rate.  International Journal of Mechanical 

Sciences, 2025.  304 : p. 110693. 

[54]  X. Chen, Q. Wang, Z. Cheng, M. Zhu, H. Zhou, P. Jiang, L. Zhou, Q. Xue, F. Yuan, J. Zhu, X. Wu, E. 

Ma , Direct observation of chemical short -range order in a medium -entropy alloy.  Nature, 2021.  592 (7856): 

p. 712 -716. 

[55]  L. Han, C. Xu, P. Li, X. Tian, W. Jiang, Q. Wang, H. Fan , Growth behavior of dislocation loops in 

FeCoNiCrCu high -entropy alloy.  Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2026.  620 : p. 156338. 

[56]  Z.H. Aitken, Y. -W. Zhang , Revealing the deformation twinning nucleation mechanism of BCC HEAs.  MRS 

Communications, 2019.  9(1): p. 406 -412. 

[57]  T.L. Dora, S.K. Singh, R.R. Mishra, H. Yu, N.K. Rawat, A. Verma , Exploring deformation mechanisms in 

a refractory high entropy alloy (MoNbTaW).  International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, 2025.  288 : p. 

110000. 

[58]  W. Jian, L. Ren , Insights into orientation -dependent plasticity deformation of HfNbTaTiZr refractory high 

entropy alloy: An atomistic investigation.  International Journal of Plasticity, 2024.  173 : p. 103867. 

[59]  S. Guo, M. Wang, S. Sui, J. Li, H. Chen, X. Hao, X. Zhao, X. Lin , Research on optimizing strength and 

ductility of HfNbTaZr dual -phase high -entropy alloy by tuning chemical short -range order.  International 

Journal of Refractory Metals and Hard Materials, 2022.  108 : p. 105942. 

[60]  F. Roters, P. Eisenlohr, L. Hantcherli, D.D. Tjahjanto, T.R. Bieler, D. Raabe , Overview of constitutive 

laws, kinematics, homogenization and multiscale methods in crystal plasticity finite -element modeling: 

Theory, experiments, applications.  Acta Materialia, 2010.  58 (4): p. 1152 -1211. 

[61]  X. He, L. Liu, T. Zeng, Y. Yao , Micromechanical modeling of work hardening for coupling microstructure 

evolution, dynamic recovery and recrystallization: Application to high entropy alloys.  International Journal 

of Mechanical Sciences, 2020.  177 : p. 105567. 

[62]  C. Alleman, D.J. Luscher, C. Bronkhorst, S. Ghosh , Distribution -enhanced homogenization framework 

and model for heterogeneous elasto -plastic problems.  Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 2015. 

85 : p. 176 -202. 

[63]  S. Chen, C. Qi, J. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Wu , Recent Advances in W -Containing Refractory High -Entropy Alloys -

An Overview.  Entropy, 2022.  24 (11). 

[64]  S.K. Varma, F. Sanchez, C.V. Ramana , Microstructures in a Nb -Cr -V-W-Ta high entropy alloy during 

annealing.  Journal of Materials Science & Technology, 2020.  53 : p. 66 -72.